
=== page 1 ===
Revisited 10 Years Later
A Quantitative Approach to Tactical Asset Allocation
Meb Faber
http://jpm.iijournals.com/content/44/2/156
https://doi.org/10.3905/jpm.2018.44.2.156doi: 
2017, 44 (2) 156-167JPM 
This information is current as of August 14, 2018.
Email Alerts
http://jpm.iijournals.com/alerts
Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up at: 
© 2017 Institutional Investor LLC. All Rights Reserved 
New York, NY 10036, Phone: +1 212-224-3589
1120 Avenue of the Americas, 6th floor,
Institutional Investor Journals
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from  by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 2 ===
156   A QuAn tit At ive ApproAc h  to tAc tic Al Asset AllocAt ion  revisited  10 YeAr s  lAt er  Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
Meb Faber
is the chief investment 
officer at Cambria 
Investment Management, 
LP, in Los Angeles, CA.
mf@cambriainvestments.com
A Quantitative Approach 
to Tactical Asset Allocation 
Revisited 10 Years Later
Meb Faber
I
n 2006, we wrote a draft white paper 
titled “A Simple Approach to Market 
Timing,” which introduced a basic 
market-timing strategy. We circulated 
it among various friends and professionals 
but quickly found that no one was partic -
ularly interested in reading it. Eventually, 
we changed the title to “A Quantitative 
Approach to Asset Allocation” and pub -
lished it (Faber [2007]), and shortly there -
after, the world was rocked by the global 
financial crisis. The strategy detailed in our 
paper performed admirably in the turmoil. 
Likely because of the performance of this 
simple system, “A Quantitative Approach to 
Asset Allocation” would go on to become 
the most downloaded paper of all time on 
Social Science Research Network (SSRN), 
with approximately 200,000 downloads.
Ten years have passed since the article 
was published, so we thought it would be 
interesting to examine how well the timing 
strategy has held up. What lessons have been 
learned? What might we have done differ -
ently with the benefit of hindsight? And what 
possible extensions and deviations exist for 
further explorations?
Note that this is not intended to be 
an expansion of the original article (Faber 
[2013] published an update to the original 
article that included substantial new con -
tent). Rather, this article should be consid -
ered an accompaniment—a reflection on 
the performance of the timing model using 
in- and out-of-sample data in the years since 
publication.
THE ORIGINAL SYSTEM
For those of you who may not have read 
the original article or would benefit from a 
refresher, the timing strategy examined was 
a trend-following strategy. Trend following 
is one of the oldest market strategies and has 
been around since at least the time of Charles 
Dow in the early 20th century.
The most often-cited long-term mea -
sure of trend in the technical analysis com -
munity is the 200-day simple moving average 
(SMA). Therefore, we decided to use this 
as our starting point and make no claims of 
originality.
We utilized the monthly version of 
the popular 200-day SMA indicator, the 
10-month simple moving average. (This was 
due mainly to the availability of historical 
market data at the monthly time frame versus 
daily.) For illustrative purposes, Exhibit  1 
presents a chart of the S&P 500 total return 
series and the 10-month SMA overlaid on top.
The following criteria are necessary 
for a trend-following model to be simple 
enough for investors to follow and mechan -
ical enough to remove emotion and subjec -
tive decision making:
1. I t must have simple, purely mechanical 
logic.
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 3 ===
the JournAl of portfolio MAnAg e Me nt   157
Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
2. T he same model and parameters must be used for 
every asset class.
3. I t must be a price-based model.
Using this logic, we only had one rule for our 
timing system: Buy the security when it is in an uptrend, 
and sell when it is in a downtrend—specifically,
• Buy Rule
• B uy when monthly price  > 10-month SMA.
• Sell Rule
• S ell and move to cash when monthly price  < 
10-month SMA.
That’s all there was to the model, but five clari -
fying bullet points are included below:
1. A ll entry and exit prices were on the day of the 
signal at the close. The model was only updated 
once a month on the last day of the month. Price 
fluctuations during the rest of the month were 
ignored.
2. A ll data series were total return series including 
dividends, updated monthly.
3. C ash returns were estimated with 90-day Treasury 
bills.
4. T axes, commissions, and slippage were excluded 
(see the Practical Considerations section later in 
the article).
5. U nless otherwise noted, all data series were total 
return series including dividends and income and 
are sourced from Global Financial Data.
Before we examine performance, please note that 
in the original article, I wrote,
The attempt is not to build an optimization model 
(indeed, the chosen parameter is decidedly sub -
optimal, as evidenced later in the article), but to 
build a simple trading model that works in most 
markets. The results suggest that a market-timing 
solution is a risk reduction technique rather than 
a return-enhancing one…The empirical results 
are equity-like returns with bond-like volatility 
and drawdown. Faber [2007, p.  1]
It’s important to understand that “beating the 
market” was never the goal of the model. The intent 
was to identify a trading system that largely approxi -
mated market returns, yet did so with significantly less 
volatility. The reason for this was simple—emotions 
can wreak havoc on investors’ ability to follow their 
e x h i b i t  1
U.S. Stocks and 10-Month SMA, 1990–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 4 ===
158   A QuAn tit At ive ApproAc h  to tAc tic Al Asset AllocAt ion  revisited  10 YeAr s  lAt er  Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
stated investment plan. All too often, we fall victim 
to fear when markets have turned against us and sell at 
nearly the worst possible time. Although many market 
historians enjoy pointing toward the healthy long-term 
average returns of most equity indexes, what good are 
those long-term averages if fear caused an investor to 
sell near a market low?
It was with this question in mind that I sought a 
model that dramatically reduced volatility and draw -
downs. The hope was that by implementing such a 
model, investors could avoid the exaggerated turbu -
lence that often results in emotion-based, money-losing 
market decisions.
So, did the system work as intended? The original 
article was published with data up through 2005. We’ll 
examine the historical in-sample results as well as the out-
of-sample returns in the 11 years since. So before delving 
into the data, what has transpired in the past decade?
In the headlines, we’ve seen the Boston Marathon 
bombing; the Russian invasion of Ukraine; the Afford -
able Care Act; the continued war with Isis, Ebola, and 
Zika; one of the most partisan periods ever in American 
politics, culminating in the election of President Trump; 
and now the increasing threat of war with North Korea. 
In the investing world, we’ve seen the global financial 
crisis and U.S. housing meltdown, followed by the 
steady march of this historic U.S. bull market, the end 
of the Fed’s Quantitative Easing program, historic lows 
in bond yields including some negative global sovereign 
yields, and multidecade highs and lows in oil prices, 
among other stories.
What has all this meant for our asset allocation 
strategies and our simple model? Have any of these head-
lines meant “this time it’s different”? Change has always 
been the constant in markets, and indeed has anything 
new really been seen in our world of investing? Bubbles, 
defaults, government interventions, bear markets, and 
fortunes made and lost—they’ve all happened before.
1 
To answer this question, let’s first examine the timing 
model on U.S. stocks before moving to the perspective 
of an asset allocation portfolio.
Now, recall all the many caveats to a study such 
as this. For most of the early part of the 20th century, 
there was no way to trade an index such as the S&P 500 
(because index funds didn’t exist in investable form until 
the 1970s); and even if you could buy a basket of stocks 
back then, trading them based on a trend system would 
have been costly because of commissions and frictions 
such as the bid–ask spread. However, it is still useful to 
test the algorithm on historical data to help establish 
a framework for how a modern system may have per -
formed in the past.
e x h i b i t  2
U.S. Stocks and Timing, 1901–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 5 ===
the JournAl of portfolio MAnAg e Me nt   159
Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
Exhibit  2 shows the performance of the timing 
model over the past century, largely avoiding the 
significant bear markets of the 1930s and 2000s. The 
exhibit also shows that utilizing timing would not have 
left the investor completely unscathed from the late 
1920s to early 1930s bear market, nor would it have 
saved the investor from the sharp drop in 1987.
Exhibit 3 zooms into the more recent 1990–2016 
period and is charted on a non-log scale to detail the dif-
ferences between the two equity curves. A few features 
of the timing model stand out. First, a trend-following 
model can underperform buy and hold during a roaring 
bull market such as the U.S. equity market in the 1990s. 
On the flip side, the timing model can avoid lengthy and 
protracted bear markets. Consequently, the value added 
by timing is evident only over the course of the entire 
business and market cycles.
Many investors will look at Exhibits  2 and 3 and 
think, “They both basically end up in the same place. Is 
it even worth it?” That is a valid question, and if buy-
and-hold investors can live through bear markets down 
40%, 60%, or even 80% and stay the course, then they 
may not need a trend-following system. However, as 
earlier noted, many investors cannot handle the draw -
downs, and as many advisors can attest, investors of all 
types are tempted to capitulate and sell in bear markets. 
On the flip side, market timing provides its own set 
of challenges—namely, whipsaws with the false signals 
often found in choppy markets; and one of the hardest 
emotional challenges of investing is looking different 
than your peers when they are performing well.
With this historical perspective in mind, let’s now 
turn to the results of our model since the original pub -
lication date. Exhibit  4 details the in-sample and out-
of-sample results for the simple timing model.
A cursory review reveals that the timing solution 
improved compounded returns while reducing risk and 
drawdowns in both periods. Volatility is measured as 
the annualized standard deviation of monthly returns. 
Drawdown is the peak-to-trough decline an investor 
would experience in an investment, and we calculate it 
here monthly.
After publication of our article, U.S. stocks were 
pummeled in the global financial crisis, then continued 
their upward trajectory. Exhibit 5 shows the yearly returns 
for U.S. stocks and the timing system, detailing the out-
of-sample performance. Though the timing system out-
performed by a significant amount during the 2008–2009 
bear market, it went on to underperform stocks six of the 
next eight years. Many investors who had implemented 
the timing model after the crash likely struggled with 
staying the course with a tactical approach.
e x h i b i t  3
U.S. Stocks and Timing Equity Curves, 1990–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 6 ===
160   A QuAn tit At ive ApproAc h  to tAc tic Al Asset AllocAt ion  revisited  10 YeAr s  lAt er  Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
Most investors don’t own only U.S. stocks but 
instead allocate to a broad spectrum of assets, including 
bonds, foreign assets, and real assets. Given this, let’s 
now turn our attention to the performance of the timing 
system as applied to a diversified global portfolio.
PORTFOLIO VIEW
Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton’s [2002] book 
Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global Investment  
Returns illustrates that many global asset classes in the 
twentieth century produced spectacular gains in wealth 
for individuals who bought and held those assets for 
generation-long holding periods. Of course, the assets 
also went through regular and painful drawdowns, such 
as in 2008. All the G-7 countries have experienced 
at least one period in which stocks lost 75% of their 
value. The unfortunate arithmetic of a 75% decline 
requires an investor to realize a 300% gain just to get 
back to even—the equivalent of compounding at 10% 
for 15 years!
The solution for most investors is to diversify 
across uncorrelated asset classes and return streams. 
Every bear market has a different personality, of course. 
The 2000–2003 bear was largely confined to the high-
flying technology stocks, and many asset classes and 
securities came nowhere close to experiencing the major 
losses suffered by market-capitalization-weighted U.S. 
stock indexes.
Exhibit  6 details the returns of five major asset 
classes from 1972 to 2005. Although the indexes traveled 
different routes from start to finish, most finished with 
similar returns over time. The exception was bonds, 
which trailed the other asset classes—an expected out -
come because of their lower volatility and risk. The fact 
that bonds were even close to the other equity-like asset 
classes in absolute performance reflects the greater-
than-twenty-year bull market that took yields from 
double-digit levels to near 2% today. The returns for a 
buy-and-hold allocation are referenced as “Global Asset 
Allocation” or “GAA” and are equally weighted across 
the five asset classes.
Higher resolution daily data and longer look-back 
periods can only increase the drawdown amount. A g ood 
rule of thumb is that risky asset classes have Sharpe ratios 
that cluster around 0.2 to 0.3, while a diversified port -
folio is around 0.4 to 0.6. Exhibit  6 shows that while 
the various asset classes posted healthy returns, they 
are coupled with some substantial drawdowns. Except 
for U.S. government bonds, which declined less than 
20%, the other four asset classes suffered drawdowns 
of around 40% to 60%. If an investor was to include 
inflation or take the data back further, those drawdowns 
only increase.
So how did these asset classes perform in the out-
of-sample period since 2005? Exhibit 7 shows the results. 
The normal benefits of diversification disappeared in 
2008, as many noncorrelated asset classes experienced 
large declines simultaneously. As written above, every 
bear market has its own personality—and whereas the 
2000–2003 bear market was largely confined to tech -
nology stocks, the 2008–2009 bear market was felt on 
a far broader basis. The GAA asset allocation port -
folio would have seen a drawdown of twice what it 
experienced in the in-sample period—a good reminder 
that the largest drawdown is always in your future.
e x h i b i t  4
U.S. Stocks and Timing Model, 1901–2005 
and 2006–2016
e x h i b i t  5
U.S. Stocks and Timing Annual Returns, 2006–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 7 ===
the JournAl of portfolio MAnAg e Me nt   161
Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
Having documented the individual returns of 
these various asset classes, let’s now evaluate the timing 
model on an aggregated portfolio level. How might the 
simplistic market-timing rule work across these various 
asset classes, as well as in the context of an investor’s 
portfolio?
The allocation we’ll evaluate consists of the five 
global asset classes mentioned above: U.S. stocks, foreign 
stocks, bonds, real estate, and commodities. The timing 
model uses equal weightings and treats each asset class 
independently; it is either long the asset class or its 20% 
allocation sits in cash. Here we refer to the timing model 
as Quantitative Tactical Asset Allocation or QTAA.
Exhibit 8 details the in-sample and out-of-sample 
equity returns.
The additional advantages conferred by timing are 
striking. Timing results in a reduction of volatility to 
single-digit levels, as well as a single-digit maximum 
drawdown in both periods. Although returns have 
been far lower for all assets in the out-of-sample period, 
timing added value.
Exhibits 9 and 10 detail the in- and out-of-sample 
equity curves as well.
For perspective, Exhibit  11 presents a chart that 
demonstrates the full period returns.
It is good to see the simple system work out of 
sample. But one might wonder, “Are these results in 
some way skewed or influenced by the specific moving 
average parameters of our model?”
Exhibit  12 demonstrates that the choice of the 
moving average doesn’t really matter all that much, and 
any of the moving average lengths would have outper -
formed a buy-and-hold allocation.
In summation, we found the model performed 
as expected despite geopolitical conflict, terrorism, 
global health scares, and other such headline-making 
news.
e x h i b i t  6
Asset Class Returns, 1972–2005
e x h i b i t  7
Asset Class Returns, 2006–2016
e x h i b i t  8
GAA and QTAA Equity Curves, 1972–2005 
and 2006–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 8 ===
162   A QuAn tit At ive ApproAc h  to tAc tic Al Asset AllocAt ion  revisited  10 YeAr s  lAt er  Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
EXTENSIONS
Since the publication of the original white paper, 
we have written six books, ten white papers, over two 
thousand blog articles, and produced nearly 100 podcast 
episodes. Some of this content addressed, in varying 
degrees, how an investor might improve upon or alter 
this basic system. Although the intent of the original 
e x h i b i t  9
GAA and QTAA Equity Curves, 1972–2005
e x h i b i t  1 0
GAA and QTAA Equity Curves, 2006–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 9 ===
the JournAl of portfolio MAnAg e Me nt   163
Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
paper was to demonstrate a simple tactical system, an 
investor can take significant departures to tailor the port-
folio to his or her own investing temperament. A  few 
deviations were mentioned in a prior paper update, and 
we will reexamine a few below. Because these were 
published in the period after the original white paper, 
we present the full sample dates (beginning in 1972) so 
as not to imply they are truly out of sample.
1. A lternative cash management strategies
2. A lternate weighting strategies
3. A dding more asset classes and tilts
Extension 1—Alternative Cash Management 
Strategies
On average, the QTAA portfolio is invested in 
approximately 30% cash because at any time, one or 
more asset classes may not be invested because of our 
trading rules. This is a drag on the portfolio, and many 
investors employ other means to increase the yield on 
the cash portion of the portfolio using any number of 
funds or concepts. Exhibit  13 looks at a simple method 
of taking on more duration risk by investing the cash 
portion of the portfolio in 10-year government bonds 
instead of Treasury bills.
e x h i b i t  1 1
GAA and QTAA Equity Curves, 1972–2016
e x h i b i t  1 2
Parameter Stability of Various Moving Average 
Lengths, GAA and QTAA, 2006–2016
e x h i b i t  1 3
Asset Allocation and QTAA Portfolios, 1972–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 10 ===
164   A QuAn tit At ive ApproAc h  to tAc tic Al Asset AllocAt ion  revisited  10 YeAr s  lAt er  Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
An investor would have realized nearly an addi -
tional 2% per annum in returns for marginally more 
volatility and drawdown—but how much of this is 
attributable to the major bull market in bonds?
Exhibit 14 demonstrates that taking on additional 
duration risk still helped during the period of sharply 
rising interest rates from 1972 to 1981.
Extension 2—Weighting Strategies
No two investors are alike. Some investors value 
wealth preservation with low volatility above all else; 
others can handle a 50% loss to generate higher gains.
Next, we look at three different allocations that we 
will call 1) QTAA Conservative, 2) QTAA Moderate, 
and 3) QTAA Aggressive. We will name the base case 
model we have already examined QTAA Moderate.
QTAA Conservative is an allocation that broadly 
follows QTAA Moderate but puts a higher weighting 
on bonds (40% versus 20%). Cash is invested in T-bills.
The QTAA Aggressive portfolio begins with the 
asset classes listed in the QTAA Moderate allocation. 
It then selects the top three out of the five assets as 
ranked by an average of 1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-month total 
returns (momentum). This method was detailed in our 
white paper, “Relative Strength Strategies for Investing” 
(Faber [2010]). The assets are only included if they are 
above their long-term moving average, otherwise that 
portion of the portfolio is moved to cash using T-bills. 
Exhibit 1 5 examines the results, and as one might expect, 
QTAA Aggressive posts the highest returns, albeit with 
increased volatility and drawdowns numbers.
Extension 3–More Assets and Tilts
Other than simplicity, there is no reason to focus 
only on five asset classes. Technically, we believe there 
are only four main asset classes: stocks, bonds, commodi-
ties, and currencies. Everything else (such as REITs) is 
a combination of the prior four.
At the same time, expanding a portfolio to include 
allocations with sizes that are less than 5% would have a 
marginal impact on the entire portfolio’s risk and reward 
characteristics. (This ignores derivatives and holdings 
with highly asymmetric payoffs.)
We also face the challenge that many asset classes 
and indexes simply have not existed for a very long time. 
For example, we do not include TIPs, junk, or high-
yield bonds, emerging bonds, foreign REITs, funda -
mental indexes, managed futures, currencies, or other 
asset classes and strategies we might otherwise consider. 
We found that 13 asset class subgroups will likely cover 
most of the global market portfolio that we would like 
to allocate to, while maintaining a large-enough alloca -
tion size to affect the overall portfolio’s performance.
Exhibit 16 expands the original portfolio from the 
original five assets to include these additional assets. We 
also decided to use tilts that have historically been shown 
to improve upon market-capitalization weightings. Note 
that we are including these tilts and adjustments with the 
full benefit of hindsight; regardless, we believe they are 
still reasonable modifications to make if implemented in 
a thoughtful and cost-effective manner. Investors need 
to be mindful of the fees they pay to express these asset 
class tilts in their portfolio. Many funds are sold on Wall 
Street with 1%+ expense ratios, likely destroying all the 
potential alpha these funds may generate.
We then look at the historical returns compared 
to the simple strategy of five asset classes. As we see in 
Exhibit 17, including more asset classes (identified by the 
“+” symbol in the column heading) improves returns by 
about 150 basis points, largely because of the tilts. We 
believe this is enough to warrant increasing the assets 
in the portfolio.
e x h i b i t  1 4
Asset Allocation and QTAA Portfolios, 1972–1981
e x h i b i t  1 5
Asset Allocation and QTAA Portfolios, 1972–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 11 ===
the JournAl of portfolio MAnAg e Me nt   165
Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
There are limitless extensions to these studies; for 
example, an investor could incorporate both the tilts and 
asset class granularity with the aggressive approach and 
cash management strategies of the prior two extensions. 
This exercise is potentially venturing into some data 
mining, but all three of the deviations are reasonable 
and pass the common sense test. Exhibit  18 examines 
some of the combined strategies.
Will those deviations add value in the future; ask 
us again in 10 years!
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
There are a few practical considerations an investor 
must analyze before implementing these models for real-
world applicability—namely, management fees, taxes, 
commissions, and slippage.
Management fees should be identical for both 
the buy-and-hold and timing models and will vary 
depending on the instrument used for investing. A fair 
estimate for these fees using ETFs and no-load mutual 
funds (obviously the lower the better) would be in the 
range of 0.03% to 0.70%. Many all-ETF portfolios can 
be formed for approximately 0.05% to 0.50%.
Commissions should be a minimal factor because of 
the low turnover of the models. On average, the investor 
would be making three to four round-trip trades per 
year for the portfolio and less than one round-trip trade 
per asset class per year. Likewise, slippage should be 
nearly negligible, because an investor can choose from 
numerous mutual funds (end-of-day pricing means zero 
slippage) as well as liquid ETFs. And many brokerages 
offer commission-free trading for some or all the funds 
on their platform.
Taxes, on the other hand, are a very real consider-
ation. Many institutional investors, such as endowments 
and pension funds, enjoy tax-exempt status. The obvious 
solution for individuals is to trade the system in a tax-
deferred account such as an IRA or 401(k). Because of 
the various capital gains rates for different investors (as 
well as varying tax rates across time and the impact of 
dividends), it is difficult to estimate the hit an investor 
would suffer from trading this system in a taxable account. 
Most investors rebalance their holdings periodically and 
introduce some turnover into the portfolio even if they 
apply a strategic buy-and-hold methodology.
The system results in a high number of short-term 
capital losses and a large percentage of long-term capital 
gains.
CONCLUSION
The purpose of the original article was to eval -
uate a simple-to-follow method for managing risk 
in a single asset class and, by extension, a portfolio 
of assets. Utilizing a monthly system since 1972, an 
e x h i b i t  1 6
Additional Asset Classes
e x h i b i t  1 7
Asset Allocation and Timing Returns, 1972–2016
e x h i b i t  1 8
Asset Allocation and Timing Returns, 1972–2016
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 12 ===
166   A QuAn tit At ive ApproAc h  to tAc tic Al Asset AllocAt ion  revisited  10 YeAr s  lAt er  Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
investor would have been able to increase risk-adjusted 
returns by diversifying portfolio assets and employing a 
market-timing solution. In addition, the investor would 
have been able to sidestep many of the protracted bear 
markets in various asset classes. Avoiding these massive 
losses would have resulted in equity-like returns with 
bond-like volatility and drawdowns. Investors looking 
to tailor their portfolios may consider using alternate 
cash strategies, more assets in the portfolio, and alterna -
tive weighting schemes to find a portfolio that is right 
for them.
As we look back and reflect, we find that QTAA 
has performed as expected out of sample, which is to 
say it performed well. Given this, it’s tempting to give 
ourselves a pat on the back. However, what if QTAA had 
performed poorly? Then likely no one would be reading 
this article, because it would never have become popular 
in the first place. So despite the great out-of-sample per-
formance, is it fair to judge our timing strategy in such 
short a time? Probably not. The value of such a model 
is better evaluated over the course of multiple decades 
rather than years (and certainly not quarters). And this 
might be especially important given where we stand 
today, looking forward to what could be in store for the 
markets over the next decade.
Although investors have benefitted from strong 
equity markets since the global financial crisis, the 
opportunity set for domestic investments is quite poor. 
Valuations for U.S. stocks using the 10-year Shiller cycli-
cally adjusted price/earnings (CAPE) have risen above a 
value of 30, which puts them well above the long-term 
average of around 17. Such a reading suggests that future 
returns could underperform historical long-term aver -
ages. Even the father of indexing, John Bogle, recently 
suggested that U.S. stocks may return about 4% in the 
coming decade. Are we to expect any help from bonds? 
Perhaps the opposite is what we should expect: U.S. 
government bond yields have declined to all-time low 
levels of around 2.3%. Looking forward, we expect 
future total bond returns to approximate their starting 
yield. Given this, investors are presented with the fol -
lowing opportunity set (assuming 2% inflation going 
forward and rounding to make it simple): U.S. stocks, 
4% nominal, 2% real; U.S. Bonds, 2% nominal, 0% real.
Will U.S. equities significantly underperform 
their long-term averages? What direction will U.S. 
bond yields go? Will alternate global asset classes 
prove to be better places for your investment capital? 
No one can answer these questions with complete accu-
racy. Given that, it’s crucial to invest thoughtfully and 
deliberately.
Most importantly, every investor should have a 
plan and process for investing in any environment, 
regardless of how improbable or unfathomable that 
may be. Are you prepared for all the possible outcomes, 
such as declines of 50% in an asset class or portfolio? 
Are you prepared not only for currency devaluations 
but also for massive rallies in stocks or bonds? Can 
you fathom a world with interest rates at 0% as well 
as at 10%?
The beauty of the simplistic timing model doc-
umented in this article is that it’s dynamic, therein 
enabling us to answer “yes” to the questions above. 
Whether you deem it appropriate or not for your own 
investing style, the broader point remains: Do you have 
a plan or process that has prepared you for tomorrow’s 
market, in whatever condition you may find it?
a p p e n d i x
DATA SOURCES
We used Global Financial Data for the data in this 
article. However, there are many free sources of data avail -
able online for the asset classes included in this article.
• S&P 500 Index —a capitalization-weighted index of 
500 stocks that is designed to mirror the performance 
of the U.S. economy. Global Financial Data provided 
the total return series and constructed the results pre-
1971. Data from 1900 to 1971 use the S&P Composite 
Price Index and dividend yields supplied by the Cowles 
Commission and from S&P itself.
• MSCI EAFE Index (Europe, Australasia, Far East)—a 
free float–adjusted market capitalization index that is 
designed to measure the equity market performance 
of developed markets, excluding the United States and 
Canada.
• U.S. Government 10-Year Bonds— a total return 
series.
• Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI)—a 
diversified basket of commodity futures that is unle -
vered and long only. This total return series is provided 
by Goldman Sachs.
• National Association of Real Estate Investment 
Trusts (NAREIT)—a total return index that reflects 
the performance of publicly traded REITs.
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 
=== page 13 ===
the JournAl of portfolio MAnAg e Me nt   167
Multi-Asset speciAl issue 2018
ENDNOTE
1For a lengthy examination of bubbles, see Faber [2011].
REFERENCES
Dimson, M., P. Marsh, and M. Staunton. Triumph of the Opti-
mists: 101 Years of Global Investment Returns . Princeton, NJ:  
Princeton University Press, 2002.
Faber, M. “A Quantitative Approach to Tactical Asset Alloca-
tion.” The Journal of Wealth Management, Vol. 9, No. 4 (2007), 
pp. 69-79.
——. “Relative Strength Strategies for Investing.” Unpub -
lished paper, April 1, 2010.
——. “Learning to Love Investment Bubbles: What If Sir 
Isaac Newton had been a Trend follower?” Cambria—Quan-
titative Research, Issue 4, September 2011.
——. “A Quantitative Approach to Tactical Asset Allocation.” 
White paper, February 1, 2013, SSRN 962461.
To order reprints of this article, please contact David Rowe at 
drowe@iijournals.com  or 212-224-3045.
 by Alex Ambroz on August 14, 2018http://jpm.iijournals.com/Downloaded from 