
=== PAGE 1 ===
Citation (Version of Record):
Taylor, N. J. (2016). Roll strategy efficiency in commodity futures
markets. Journal of Commodity Markets, 1(1), 14-34.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomm.2015.12.001
Version:
Peer reviewed version
License (if available):
CC BY-NC-ND
Link to published version (if available):
10.1016/j.jcomm.2015.12.001
Link to publication record on the Bristol Research Portal:
Access record including PDF (if available)
University of Bristol – Bristol Research Portal
This is the author accepted manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via Elsevier at http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405851315300143. Please refer to any
applicable terms of use of the publisher.
Citing this paper
Guidance on citing material from the Bristol Research Portal is available under ‘Manuscripts and Citations’ in the
Terms of Use (linked below)
Terms of Use
Full Terms of Use for the Bristol Research Portal are available online: https://www.bristol.ac.uk/research-
enterprise-innovation/research-policy/pure/brp-terms/
Has this research benefited you?
Let us know how reading this research here has been meaningful to you by
sharing your story at https://forms.office.com/e/ffL5CZ0fGT
Bristol Research Portal Coversheet last updated 21-07-2026
=== PAGE 2 ===
Roll strategy eﬃciency in commodity futures markets I
Nick Taylora
aSchool of Economics, Finance and Management, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TN, UK.
Abstract
Issues pertaining to the investor decision to sell a security and buy another (of the same type and
with the same terms) with a longer period until the expiration date (the roll forward decision) are
examined. In particular, a framework is developed in which it is possible to test the trade execution
quality eﬃciency of a roll strategy against a mean-variance optimal roll strategy characterized by
multiple-day roll. Applying this framework to ve leading US grain futures markets (corn, wheat,
soybean, soybean meal and soybean oil) demonstrates that commonly used single-day and multiple-
day roll strategies (including the Goldman roll strategy) exhibit considerable ineﬃciencies. These
are consistent over the markets and over the time of the day in which trading occurs, and vary
with execution quality risk-aversion in a predictable way. A practical multiple-day roll strategy is
proposed that reduces these ineﬃciencies.
Keywords: Roll strategy, execution risk, Bayesian inference, Goldman roll.
JEL: C11, G11, G13.
II thank participants in the European Financial Management Association Conference at Nyenrode University and
in the departmental nance seminar at the University of Strathclyde for helpful comments.
Email address: nick.taylor@bristol.ac.uk (Nick Taylor)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier December 2, 2015
=== PAGE 3 ===
1. Introduction
A large number of investment strategies involve the decision of when to sell a security and buy
another (of the same type and with the same terms) with a longer period until the expiration date
(the roll forward decision). For instance, a portfolio manager with responsibility for a diversied
portfolio of assets that includes a commodity market component will undoubtedly have positions in
commodity derivative contracts. Consequently, the manager must decide when to roll forward the
derivative contracts which are close to maturity. Likewise, a stack hedger with a risk exposure to
a particular commodity market that extends beyond the maturity of available derivative contracts
faces a similar decision. A key factor in such decisions is expected trade execution quality. The
approach taken in the current paper considers this decision such that this component is optimized.
There are a number of conventional approaches to the roll forward decision, all of which exploit
the periodic nature of expected execution quality in the period leading up to contract maturity (cf.
the vast majority of trade scheduling environments). These can be categorized as either single-day
or multiple-day strategies. The former assumes that the securities roll forward on a single day that
is a xed number of days prior to the maturity date. By contrast, multiple-day strategies involve
spreading the roll forward over a nite number of days prior to the maturity date. For instance,
the commonly used Goldman roll strategy involves a commodity futures roll (with uniform weights)
between the fth and ninth business days of the month preceding the expiration month. The likely
virtue of such a strategy in comparison to the single-day strategy is that the user has a lower risk
of being exposed to poor execution quality. It is this conjecture that is examined in the current
paper.
The advent of electronic trading platforms has led to an increasing number of nancial institu-
tions employing algorithmic trading systems. A key component of these systems is trade scheduling,
dened according to a trade target, that is, the number of asset units (shares or contracts) to be
bought or sold during a pre-specied nite time horizon. Specically, trade scheduling involves
specifying the rate at which these asset units are traded over this period (referred to as the trade
list) in order to optimize execution quality. Within the context of derivative markets, a simple-
to-implement trade scheduling procedure is proposed that solves the problem of when traders in
such markets should switch from contracts that are close to maturity to deferred contracts (hence-
2
=== PAGE 4 ===
forth referred to as the roll strategy). This strategy applies irrespective of whether the user has
speculative, hedging, or arbitrage motives.
Trade scheduling is important as it is a signicant determinant of the overall success of a
trading strategy. The academic literature has recognized this importance. The vast majority of
studies propose strategies that optimize the tradeoﬀ between pricing impact and timing risk; see
Almgren and Chriss (2001), He and Mamaysky (2005), Engle and Ferstenberg (2007), Schied and
Schoeneborn (2009), Forsyth et al. (2012), and Tse et al. (2013) for a representative sample. 1 This
literature is complemented by proposing a framework that is designed specically to examine the
quality of the roll decision faced by participants in markets in which there is periodic variation in
execution quality. Our framework has some overlap with this literature, but fundamentally diﬀers
in terms of the tradeoﬀ undertaken.
The trade scheduling literature typically adopts the following framework. A trader wishes to
sell a xed number of asset units over a nite horizon. Execution quality is typically measured
by comparing the total revenue generated by selling at the arrival price (the price observed when
the trade instruction is received) and the total revenue generated by selling these units over the
horizon, with the diﬀerence referred to as the implementation shortfall (Perold 1988). Within
this context, price impact is generated by assuming that the asset is subject to trading costs that
increase disproportionately with the trading rate (for instance, most studies adopt a quadratic cost
model). This provides the incentive to avoid fast liquidation. By contrast, timing risk represents
the risk of trading at prices away from the arrival price (induced by assuming that prices evolve
in a stochastic fashion). These two eﬀects are commonly balanced such that execution quality is
optimized within a mean-variance framework in which the expected implementation shortfall is
minimized subject to a pre-specied implementation shortfall variance. Moreover, these moments
are determined from the perspective of a single trader prior to the trading taking place. 2
Within our setup a trader holds a position in the rst month maturity derivative contract set and
1The former of these re
ects the increased costs of immediate trading based on liquidity considerations, while the
latter risk measures the costs associated with delayed trading at prices away from those anticipated.
2The literature based on this framework can be categorized in many ways. Perhaps the most obvious way is to
label papers in terms of whether conditional or unconditional strategies are proposed. The former consists of a trade
schedule that is mean-variance eﬃcient with respect to implementation shortfall, but does not change over time to
re
ect changing market conditions (see, e.g., Almgren and Chriss 2001). By contrast, conditional strategies are also
mean-variance eﬃcient but adapt to dynamic variation in market conditions (see, e.g., Bertsimas and Lo 1998).
3
=== PAGE 5 ===
wishes to schedule trades over the period prior to the rst notice day (FND) such that the position
is replaced by a corresponding position in the rst back month derivative contract set. 3 Applying
the conventional trade scheduling approach would not be appropriate. To see this, rst note that
the current application involves simultaneous trading in two (near) perfectly correlated price series
(that is, prices of the rst month and rst back month derivative contract sets). Consequently,
positive future shocks to prices will lead to falls in the implementation shortfall associated with
the former contract set; however, the implementation shortfall associated with the latter contract
set will rise and oﬀset the former contract set implementation shortfall. The net eﬀect means that
there is essentially no timing risk in the strategy. For this reason, a diﬀerent perspective on the
problem is taken.
The proposed framework is one in which execution quality is optimized from the perspective of
a trading desk manager who is concerned about the ex post unconditional mean and variance of
execution quality over a series of trade lists (cf. the perspective of a single trader who is concerned
about the ex ante moments of a single trade list). 4 Within our framework, the mean-variance
optimal trading desk manager will typically face a tradeoﬀ between achieving a maximum level
of mean execution quality with high variance (achieved by focusing trading on a particular day
prior to the FND), against a lower level of mean execution quality with lower variance (achieved
by spreading trading over several days).
The trader within the proposed framework could be a (stack) hedger, speculator, or arbitrageur
{ all that is relevant is that the trader requires a roll strategy to maintain a broader trading strategy.
This includes market timing traders who seek to exploit systematic variation in roll yields (the price
diﬀerence between the front month and rst back month contract). 5 This could be achieved by
3Within the context of commodity derivatives, the FND represents the day after which a roll can occur to avoid
taking physical deliver of the underlying commodity.
4There have been previous studies of the roll decision in futures markets. Motivated by the abnormal volatility in
futures prices close to their maturity (Samuelson 1965), this literature focuses on the eﬀect of single day roll selection
on the return series (and not execution quality). Using a variety of futures data, Carchano and Pardo (2009) nd
that there are no signicant diﬀerences in the return series over a variety of diﬀerent roll date selection criteria (cf.
Ma et al. 1992).
5There is some empirical evidence that is consistent with higher roll yields prior to and during the Goldman roll
period; see Mou (2011). However, many studies document contrary evidence. For instance, using diﬀerent data and
sample periods, Stoll and Whaley (2010) and Hamilton and Wu (2015) nd little evidence of price patterns, while
Bessembinder et al. (2012) document that such eﬀects disappear within minutes. Thus it seems that as information
regarding use of commercial roll strategies is in the public domain, any remaining patterns are likely to be due to
limited arbitrage eﬀects that cannot be exploited.
4
=== PAGE 6 ===
optimising the roll strategy with respect to roll yields as opposed to execution quality. However, the
analysis presented in this paper demonstrates that such a strategy is unlikely to be highly eﬃcient
as these data do not exhibit the strong periodicities present in execution quality. Consequently, we
focus on roll strategies that are optimal with respect to execution quality. 6
The mean-variance approach adopted in this paper is analogous to the approach taken in the
portfolio theory literature. Consequently, we are able to borrow concepts from this well-developed
literature. In particular, the eﬃciency of competing roll strategies is examined using Bayesian
inference based on Monte Carlo simulation; see, e.g., Kandel et al. (1995) for use of this technique
within the portfolio theory literature. To anticipate some of our results, using data from ve main
US grain futures markets (corn, wheat, soybean, soybean meal and soybean oil), we nd that roll
strategies based on trading on single days prior to the FND (as is often advocated in practice) are
ineﬃcient with respect to a mean-variance optimal roll strategy. Moreover, for a suﬃciently risk-
averse trading desk manager, a strategy that acknowledges the need to diversify trading over several
days, delivers an economically meaningful improvement in performance over a roll strategy that
focuses exclusively on the maximum mean execution quality day, and a commonly used multiple-day
roll strategy based on the Goldman roll dates. 7
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the methodologies used.
Section 3 contains the application. Section 4 concludes.
2. The F ramework
In this section, we introduce the measures of execution quality, formalize the roll decision faced
by traders, and develop a solution to this problem. Moreover, methodologies associated with
assessing the merits of this solution are presented.
2.1. Constructing the execution quality measure
The choice of which measure of execution quality to use is important. We use a transaction
cost-based measure and a liquidity-based measure of execution quality, viz. the bid-ask spread and
6The rollover strategy is not self-nancing and will require injections and withdrawals of funds because of the
incurred variation in roll yields over time.
7See DeMiguel et al. (2009) for empirical support for the use of the 1 =N portfolio strategy within the portfolio
theory literature.
5
=== PAGE 7 ===
the illiquidity ratio. Specically, the execution quality measures associated with trading the type i
contract set on day n are given by
Measure 1: Yi;n =  1  si;n; (1a)
Measure 2: Yi;n =  1  i;n=vi;n; (1b)
where si;n is the daily bid-ask spread, such that it represents the absolute value of the diﬀerence
between the observed and true asset price, i;n is the daily volatility of the true asset price change,
and vi;n is the daily dollar trading volume. The bid-ask spread and true price change volatility are
constructed using the method of moments estimator introduced by Smith and Whaley (1994).
To concisely dene this estimator, some preliminary notation is required: let day n have unit
length, and let the full grid of all observation points (trades) be given by G = fn1; : : : ; nmg. Given
this notation, the daily eﬀective spread and true price change volatility are given by the solution
to the following simultaneous equations:
1
m
m∑
j=1
jPi;nj;+   Pi;nj j =
√
2
 i;ne s2
i;n=22
i;n   si;n(1   2(si;n=i;n)); (2a)
1
m
m∑
j=1
jPi;nj;+   Pi;nj j2 = 2
i;n + s2
i;n (2b)
where Pi;nj is the contract type i price associated with the jth trade of day n, nj;+ represents the
next observation after nj on G, and ( :) is the standard normal cumulative density function. 8 The
estimated eﬀective spread and true price change volatility are obtained by numerically solving these
equations for each trading day and contract type in the sample.
2.2. Formalizing the Problem
The roll decision framework is designed to allow a range of unconditional roll strategies to be
examined with respect to an optimal unconditional roll strategy. This framework is built on the
following assumptions.
8See Smith and Whaley (1994) for details of the advantages of this bid-ask spread estimator over competing
estimators such as Roll's (1984) serial covariance-based estimator and Thompson and Waller's (1988) mean absolute
price change-based estimator.
6
=== PAGE 8 ===
Assumption 1. A trader is endowed with  contracts in the front month derivative contract set
(henceforth referred to as the type 1 set ).
Assumption 2. The trader wishes to roll the position forward to the rst back month derivative
contract set (henceforth the type 2 set ). This is henceforth referred to as a roll event .
Assumption 3. To avoid physical deliver of the underlying asset the trader unwinds the position in
the type 1 set prior to the FND and creates a new position in the type 2 set. This is henceforth
referred to as the roll strategy.
Assumption 4. The days on which trading occurs are given by n = f1; 2; : : : ; Ng, with N repre-
senting the day immediately prior to the type 1 set FND (henceforth referred to as event time ).
Given this notation, the roll strategy requires that  contracts (henceforth the trade target ) are
held in the type 2 set on day N + 1.
Assumption 5. Trading can take place on one or more days prior to the FND, with 1;n (2;n)
representing the number of type 1 (type 2) set contracts sold (bought) on the nth trading day.
This implies that
N∑
n=1
1;n =
N∑
n=1
2;n = : (3)
Here 1;n ( 0) and 2;n ( 0) are henceforth referred to as trade quantities, with the collection of
trade quantities representing the trade list .
Remark. To minimize impact costs, this trading is assumed to take place continuously over the
trading day.
Assumption 6. On each day, the type 1 set trade quantity equals the type 2 set trade quantity,
thus n  1;n = 2;n 8n.
Remark. The synchronicity of the selling and buying of the type 1 and type 2 set contracts (re-
spectively) means that the problem is reduced from 2 N to N unknown parameters.
Assumption 7. The trading desk manager is unconditionally mean-variance eﬃcient (MVE) with
respect to the aggregate execution quality associated with the roll strategy, and requires a mean
aggregate execution quality level of s (standardized by portfolio size).
Remark. The unconditional mean and variance are calculated over a series of roll events.
7
=== PAGE 9 ===
Remark. Aggregate execution quality associated with the roll strategy is dened as follows:
L 
N∑
n=1
nYn;  n  0 8n; (4)
where Yn = Y1;n + Y2;n is the sum of execution quality levels over the type 1 and 2 sets on day n,
and Yi;n is the execution quality measure given by (1a) or (1b).
Under the above assumptions, the problem can be stated in terms of the following behavioral
assumption. The objective of the MVE trading desk manager is to minimize the variance of
aggregate execution quality (execution risk) subject to constraints (a) to (c):
minimize

⊤Ω
subject to ( a) ⊤ = s;
(b) {⊤ = ;
(c)   0;
where
 =
0
BBBB@
E [Y1]
...
E [YN ]
1
CCCCA
; Ω =
0
BBBB@
var [Y1] : : : cov[Y1; YN ]
... . . . ...
cov[YN ; Y1] : : : var [YN ]
1
CCCCA
:
Here  is an ( N  1) vector of trade quantities, { is an ( N  1) vector of ones, and 0 is an ( N  1)
vector of zeros.
Given the denition of aggregate execution quality it follows that var( L) = ⊤Ω, hence the
objective function given in the behavioral assumption. Similarly, constraint (a) is obtained by
setting E( L) = ⊤ to the required mean execution quality level  s. Constraints (b) and (c)
follow from Assumption 5.
The above represents a standard quadratic programming problem, with the roll strategy based
on the solution (obtained by numerical methods) referred to as the MVE roll strategy. The ap-
proach is deliberately unconditional in nature as it exploits the periodicity in execution quality
observed during the period prior to the derivative contract maturity. Other nancial markets do
not exhibit this feature, and consequently, conditional approaches may dominate unconditional ap-
8
=== PAGE 10 ===
proaches in those markets. By contrast, we conjecture that the unconditional approach dominates
the conditional approach in markets characterized by strong periodic variation { a view that is
supported by the popularity of unconditional approaches such as the Goldman roll strategy.
2.3. Analogy to portfolio theory
Without loss of generality, portfolio size can be set equal to unity, that is,  = 1. In doing
this, the trade quantities in  can be interpreted as trade weights . Moreover, it becomes apparent
that the MVE roll strategy framework is similar to the classic portfolio theory framework in which
a portfolio of assets is constructed to minimize the return risk associated with a required mean
return. Indeed, the above behavioral assumption is directly analogous to the case in which the
variance of portfolio returns is minimized subject to a short sale constraint. Consequently, the
same numerical procedures used in the portfolio theory literature can be used to derive a solution
to the above optimization problem.
Within the portfolio theory framework the choice revolves around how much wealth should be
invested in the N assets. By contrast, our problem consists of when trades should take place over
N days. This choice delivers a minimum variance of portfolio returns or of aggregate execution
quality. Moreover, this choice depends on the contemporaneous correlations among the N asset
returns, or the lagged correlations among the execution quality levels observed on diﬀerent days in
the N periods prior to the FND. In both cases, repeated observations of these returns or execution
quality levels exist over which the unconditional sample mean and variance can be estimated.
2.4. Measuring strategy performance
An examination of the quality of a particular roll strategy with respect to the above MVE roll
strategy is required. To this end, we take from the portfolio theory literature and consider the
standard deviation reduction achieved by conducting the MVE roll strategy with respect to the
competing roll strategy. Formally, strategy ineﬃciency is given by
 = (s=)   1; (5)
where 2
 = ⊤
 Ω is the variance of aggregate execution quality associated with the MVE strategy,
2
s = ⊤
s Ωs is the variance of aggregate execution quality associated with the competing roll
9
=== PAGE 11 ===
strategy,  denotes the MVE weights, s denotes the weights associated with the competing roll
strategy, ⊤
  = ⊤
s  = s, {⊤ = {⊤s = 1, and   0 and s  0. Note that the required
mean aggregate execution quality level is dictated by the mean aggregate execution quality achieved
via the competing roll strategy. Consequently, this measure gives the ratio of standard deviations
for strategies with the same mean.
A graphical representation of the potential gains to using the MVE roll strategy is provided in
panel (a) of Figure 1. Consider ve pre-selected strategies represented by the points A, B, C, D
and E. All points on the mean-variance frontier between A and E can be achieved by the MVE roll
strategy, including the global minimum variance (GMV) point given by C ′.
Insert Figure 1 here
The rst feature of panel (a) to note is that points A and E must lie on the mean-variance
frontier. These points represent the maximum and minimum mean execution quality levels, re-
spectively. As the weights are all non-negative it follows that one cannot achieve mean execution
quality levels outside of these limits. For all other points a reduction in variance is possible. It is
clear that A is superior to B, B is superior to C, and so on (as we have assumed that they have
equal variance). However, the variance reductions do not increase over this space. Indeed, points
A and E deliver the same (zero) reduction in variance.
As an alternative we assume that the variances associated with strategies that deliver a mean
execution quality level below the GMV mean execution quality level ( m) are given by the GMV.
This amounts to replacing the minimum variance frontier from C ′ to E with the vertical line linking
points C ′ to E ′ in panel (b). Formally, strategy ineﬃciency is given by
 =
8
>><
>>:
(s=)   1; if s  m;
(s=m)   1; otherwise;
(6)
where 2
m = ⊤
mΩm is the variance of aggregate execution quality associated with the GMV roll
strategy, m denotes the GMV weights, ⊤
  = ⊤
s  = s, ⊤
m = m, {⊤ = {⊤s = {⊤m = 1,
and   0, s  0 and m  0. See Kandel and Stambaugh (1987) for a similar measure of
ineﬃciency within the context of portfolio eﬃciency.
10
=== PAGE 12 ===
The second performance measure that we consider is designed to assess the economic signicance
of a strategy (say strategy A) with respect to a competing strategy (say strategy B). To this end,
we consider the level of compensation  (`performance fee' measured in terms of execution quality
units) that the user of strategy A must receive in order to be as well oﬀ as the user of strategy
B; see Fleming et al. (2001) for use of such a performance measure within the portfolio theory
literature.
Formally, a manager with the following preferences is assumed:
U (L) = L   (1   )2
L;  2 [0; 1]; (7)
where L = ⊤, 2
L = ⊤Ω, and  measures the risk preferences of the trading desk manager.
Within this context, we seek  in
U (LA + ) = U (LB): (8)
Using (7) and this denition we can rearrange to obtain
 = B   A +
(
1   

)
(2
A   2
B);  2 (0; 1]; (9)
where A = ⊤
A, B = ⊤
B , 2
A = ⊤
AΩA, and 2
B = ⊤
B ΩB.
2.5. Conducting inference
A portfolio theory literature exists that proposes methods by which one can assess whether
a return portfolio is mean-variance eﬃcient. Two primary approaches are possible: one based
on classical inference and one based on Bayesian inference; see, e.g., Gibbons et al. (1989) and
Kandel et al. (1995), respectively. The former tranche derives asymptotic tests (only), and is
highly technical in the presence of portfolio weight restrictions; see, e.g., De Roon et al. (2001) for
the case of portfolio eﬃciency testing when short sale constraints are imposed. To overcome these
issues, we follow Li et al. (2003) and adopt an easy-to-implement Bayesian approach that is able
to incorporate the nite sample uncertainty into the (posterior) distribution of the performance
measures described in the previous subsection.
Our observations consist of data associated with T contract pairs (type 1 and 2 sets). Let
11
=== PAGE 13 ===
t = f1; : : : ; Tg index the roll events over time, and Yt be an ( N  1) vector containing the sum of
execution quality levels over the type 1 and 2 sets for each day n in roll event t. Assume that Yt
has a multivariate normal distribution, with mean  and covariance matrix Ω. We use a standard
diﬀuse prior for this distribution
p(; Ω) / jΩj (N +1)=2: (10)
Given a sample of T observations, the joint posterior distribution of  and Ω is given by
p(; ΩjY1; : : : ;YT ) = p(jΩ;b; Y1; : : : ;YT )  p(ΩjbΩ; Y1; : : : ;YT ); (11)
where b and bΩ are the sample counterparts to  and Ω. Standard results demonstrate that the
marginal posterior distribution p(ΩjbΩ; Y1; : : : ;YT ) is the inverted Wishart distribution with scale
matrix T bΩ and T   1 degrees of freedom, and the conditional distribution p(jΩ;b; Y1; : : : ;YT )
is the multivariate normal distribution with mean b and covariance matrix Ω=T .
The marginal posterior distributions of  and  are complicated functions of the joint posterior
distribution of  and Ω. Consequently, analytical derivations are not possible. Instead, Monte
Carlo simulation is used to derive the empirical distributions based on the computed values of 
and ; see Geweke (1989) for a demonstration of the accuracy of this approach. Specically, we
repeatedly draw (100000 times) a random sample of  and Ω from the above posterior distributions
and compute the  and  values for each sample. These are then used to construct their empirical
distributions upon which inference is conducted. We refer to this as the Bayesian approach in the
remainder of the paper.
3. Application
In this section the foregoing methodologies are applied to a grain futures dataset, such that the
quality of a variety of competing roll strategies are examined.
3.1. Data
All trades in the corn, wheat, soybean, soybean meal and soybean oil futures markets traded
on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) over the period, January 1, 2007, to December 31,
12
=== PAGE 14 ===
2014, are considered. 9 In particular, time and sales data associated with all type 1 and type 2
sets were obtained for each market (with ticker symbols CN, WC, SY, SM and BO, respectively)
from TickData, Inc. 10 These data were collected over the daytime and nighttime trading periods
in which both markets are open. 11
The type 1 and type 2 sets are synchronized such that overlapping data over event time from
25 days before to one day before the FND (which occurs on the last business day of the month
prior to the expiration month) for each roll event in the sample are considered. Missing data (or no
trading days) associated with either set type result in pairwise deletion of the observation over both
sets (though this occurs very rarely). A roll event coincides with the maturity of each contract in
the dataset. Corn and wheat futures markets each have ve maturity cycles per year, the soybean
futures market has seven, and the soybean meal and soybean oil futures markets each have eight
of these cycles per year. With eight years of data used, this gives rise to 40 (corn and wheat), 56
(soybean), and 64 (soybean meal and soybean oil) roll events. Moreover, as we use 25 overlapping
observations per roll event this gives 1000, 1400, and 1600 daily observations, respectively.
3.2. Estimation details
For each replication of the data within the Monte Carlo simulation, the quadratic programming
problem in subsection 2.2 is solved for each grain futures market using the QPROG application
in GAUSS 11.0 (64-bit version). If the algorithm fails to return a converged solution then the
replication is discarded and a fresh replication of the data is taken.
3.3. Data description
To provide an initial overview, the data are categorized according to the number of days to the
FND, and in terms of two trading period assumptions. The rst considers data from any trading
period in the sample (referred to as sample A), and the second considers data from Monday to
Friday daytime trading periods only (referred to as sample B). Three main characteristics of the
9These futures market data represent the union of the grain futures market data used in the construction of
the Standard and Poor's-Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (SP-GSCI) and the Dow Jones-UBS Commodity Index
(DJ-UBSCI). The latter has recently changed its title to the Bloomberg Commodity Index (BCOM).
10All prices pertain to CME Globex (electronic platform) transactions to re
ect the dominance of this trading
mechanism over the sample period.
11The current (circa May 2015) trading times of these markets are: Sunday to Friday, 7.00pm to 7.45am (CT); and
Monday to Friday, 8.30am to 1.15pm (CT).
13
=== PAGE 15 ===
data emerge. First, the corn futures market is the most actively traded grain futures market in
the sample, while the soybean meal futures market is the least traded. Second, trading activity
observed in sample B is generally higher than that observed in sample A. For this reason we make
exclusive use of the latter sample in the subsequent analysis. Third, there is systematic variation
(periodicity) in execution quality over event time.
The periodicity in both measures of execution quality can be appreciated by observing the shape
of the mean, autocorrelation (rst-order), and variance plots in panels (a), (b) and (c) of Figures 2
and 3. These are based on standardized execution quality such that for each roll event they have a
zero mean and unit variance, and are plotted against event time (in days). 12 The execution quality
measure for each day prior to the FND is constructed by assuming that the weight equals unity for
that particular day in event time. 13
Insert Figures 2 & 3 here
The plot in panel (a) in Figure 2 demonstrates that there is a clear pattern in mean execution
quality for each grain futures market. In particular, execution quality increases up to around eight
days prior to the FND and then decreases. 14 This nding is consistent with the observation that
contracts generally roll during this period. 15 It also shows some variation in the pattern, with some
markets exhibiting less dened patterns; see, e.g., corn futures execution quality periodicity. The
plots in panels (b) and (c) demonstrate that there is also periodicity in autocorrelation (rst-order)
and variance. The same picture emerges in Figure 3.
It is also important to document the nature of the contemporaneous relations among the mea-
12The use of standardized execution quality is useful on two counts. First, it provides a measure of execution quality
that can be used to assess its economic signicance, that is, it is measured in standard deviation terms. Second, it
removes any trends in execution quality over the sample period. For these reasons, standardized execution quality is
used in the remainder of the paper.
13The mean vector and covariance matrix associated with execution quality are smoothed. In particular, the
estimated mean vector and diagonal elements of the covariance matrix are obtained by using a Gaussian kernel
smoother with bandwidth equal to 0 :25N  0:4. For the covariance matrix we set all oﬀ-diagonal elements beyond the
rst-order serial covariance entries to zero.
14This inverted U-shape pattern is consistent with the results in Wang et al. (2013) who document a similar pattern
in the bid-ask spreads associated with electronically traded corn futures.
15For instance, the online broker AvaTrade roll clients' grain futures contracts on the last Sunday prior to the FND.
Moreover, though the CME does not appear to make an explicit roll date recommendation for grain futures investors,
for equity index futures they impose a roll dates eight business trades prior to the FND. It should also be noted that
data vendors such as Tickdata.com supply continuous futures prices under a number of diﬀerent roll assumptions
that include roll on the 20th calender day of the month preceding the expiration month. This date coincides with
the period six to ten days prior to the FND.
14
=== PAGE 16 ===
sures of execution quality. In particular, if there is a signicant relationship between either of the
execution quality measures and roll yields then this could invalidate the ndings of the paper. For
instance, a strategy that selects the best day in terms of execution quality (e.g., lowest bid-ask
spread) could, at the same time, select the most undesirable day in terms of the price diﬀerence
between the front month and rst back month contracts (as given by the roll yield). Thus any
gains in execution costs could be outweighed by losses due to the roll yield.
To investigate the above possibility the following regression model is estimated:
Yn;t = a + bXn;t + ϵn;t; n = 1; : : : ; N; t = 1; : : : ; T; (12)
where Yn;t is the execution quality measure on day n in roll event t, Xn;t is the roll yield on
day n in roll event t, and ϵn;t is a suitably dened error term. Two methodologies are used to
estimate the parameters a and b. The rst employs an ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator
applied to pooled observations such that the parameters are assumed constant over roll event time
(henceforth the pooled OLS methodology). By contrast, the second employs the methodology of
Fama and MacBeth (1973) such that variation in the parameters in permitted over roll event time
(henceforth the Fama-MacBeth methodology). 16 Results associated with the slope coeﬃcient, each
grain market and both measures of execution quality are provided in Table 1.
Insert Table 1 here
The results provide clear evidence that a systematic relationship between execution quality and
roll yields does not exist. In particular, the slope coeﬃcient is insignicantly diﬀerent from zero
for almost all markets and execution quality measures. Thus the subsequent analysis pertaining
to optimal decision making in terms of execution quality does not have implications for prots or
losses due to price diﬀerences in the front month and rst back month contracts.
16The Fama-MacBeth methodology involves a number of stages. First, the parameters are estimated within each
roll event. Second, the mean and (Newey-West) standard errors of the parameters over roll event time are then
constructed. Third, inference is conducted by assuming that the ratio of the mean to standard error has a normal
distribution.
15
=== PAGE 17 ===
3.4. Assumption evaluation
The approach taken in this paper is unconditional in nature and takes advantage of the strong
periodicity in execution quality evinced in Figures 2 and 3. It could be argued that a conditional
approach could also be applied in which the roll decision is dependent on market conditions. One
possibility is to use forecasts of execution quality within each roll event based on a dynamic model
(for example, an autoregressive model) to inform this decision. The success of this approach
ultimately depends on whether execution quality is predictable within this space. If the approach
is successful (over all forecast horizons) then this may justify use of a conditional roll strategy. To
examine this possibility the quality of forecasts based on an autoregressive model are compared to
those based on a periodic model.
The framework used to examine the nature of the predictability of execution quality is built on
the following forecasting model:
Yn+h;t = a+
p∑
i=1
biYn i+1;t+
q∑
j=1
cjXn j+1;t+
N  h∑
k=2
dkDk;n;t+ϵn+h;t; n = 1; : : : ; N h; t = 1; : : : ; T;
(13)
where Yn;t is the execution quality measure on day n in roll event t, where Xn;t is an exogenous
variable observed on day n in roll event t, Dk;n;t is a dummy variable that equals unity if k coincides
with n and zero otherwise, and ϵn+h;t is a suitably dened error term. Three versions of this model
are estimated. The rst is a naive model in which bi = cj = dk = 0 8ijk; the second is a periodic
model in which bi = cj = 0 8ij; the third is an autoregressive-periodic model in which ck = 0 8k,
and the fourth is an autoregressive-periodic model that includes an exogenous variable (henceforth
an augmented autoregressive-periodic model) in which no restrictions are imposed. The exogenous
variable is given by the VIX volatility index. 17
The parameters in these four models are estimated using ordinary least squares using the in-
sample period, with forecasts constructed in the out-of-sample period using these parameters.
Performance is assessed by constructing the mean square forecast error (MSFE) for each model
with p and q set equal to one. The relative MSFE values (that is, one model's MSFE value divided
17The use of the VIX index is designed to capture the previously documented relationship between execution quality
and volatility; see, e.g., Bessembinder and Seguin (1993) and Bollerslev and Melvin (1994) for empirical evidence of
the relations between volatility, trading volume, market depth and bid-ask spreads.
16
=== PAGE 18 ===
by a competing model's MSFE value) associated with the naive, periodic, autoregressive-periodic
and augmented autoregressive-periodic models are expressed in percentage terms (henceforth the
MSFE ineﬃciency ). These are provided in Table 2 for each grain market, various in-sample period
sizes, forecast horizons of one to ve days and both measures of execution quality. 18
Insert Table 2 here
The results indicate that the periodic model delivers the best forecasts. For instance, when
using corn futures bid-ask spread data, an in-sample size equal to half of the full sample and 1-
step ahead forecasts, the MSFE ineﬃciency associated with the naive model with respect to the
periodic model is 7.89%. By contrast, when the periodic model is compared to the autoregressive-
periodic (augmented autoregressive-periodic) model, the MSFE ineﬃciency drops to just 1.31%
(1.36%). Similar ineﬃciencies exist over the other futures markets, in-sample sizes and forecast
horizons (particularly beyond one period). Thus, as periodic eﬀects appear to be an important
characteristic of execution quality, it follows that the unconditional approach taken in this paper
is sensible.
The above forecasting models also enable examination of the implicit assumption that roll yields
do not have exploitable systematic variation over event time (that is, no periodicity) { see Remark
to Assumption 3. The quality of this assumption is tested by using roll yields (dened as the log of
the ratio of contemporaneous type 1 to type 2 prices) as the dependent variable, and examining the
quality of the naive model applied to these data with respect to the periodic model. The results in
Table 2 reveal that the naive model is not ineﬃcient in this regard. Indeed, on many occasions it
is more eﬃcient than the periodic model (that is, negative MSFE ineﬃciency values). This result
lends support to our argument that roll yields are essentially 
at over event time and can thus be
excluded from the analysis of execution quality; see, e.g., Stoll and Whaley (2010) and Hamilton
and Wu (2015) for consistent evidence.
3.5. Strategy ineﬃciency
To assess the performance of a particular roll strategy, information relating to the distribution
of the ineﬃciency measure  obtained using the Bayesian approach described in subsection 2.4 is
18For reasons of space, results associated with the augmented autoregressive-periodic model are limited to corn
futures. Use of the other futures data deliver similar results and are available on request.
17
=== PAGE 19 ===
provided. These ineﬃciencies are calculated by comparing the MVE roll strategy with a selection
of s-day roll strategies in which the roll is concentrated on a single day (day s) only. The MVE
roll strategy is restricted to deliver a mean aggregate execution quality level equal to that delivered
by the s-day roll strategy. The results are provided in Table 3 (bid-ask spread data) and Table 4
(illiquidity ratio data).
Insert Tables 3 & 4 here
The results demonstrate that the s-day strategies are highly ineﬃcient over all grain futures
markets.19 Moreover, these ineﬃciencies are present over all days, though some variation is appar-
ent. For instance, using corn futures bid-ask spread data, a roll focused on one day before the FND
has a mean ineﬃciency of 6.70 (that is, execution quality risk is 6.70 times higher when the single-
day roll strategy is used). By contrast, a roll eight days before the FND has a mean ineﬃciency of
1.70. It can also be observed that the ineﬃciencies are at their minimum value around eight days
prior to the FND. Indeed, the distribution of the ineﬃciency measure indicates that the benet of
using the MVE roll strategy is at least zero with a posterior probability of 0.9 (or higher) around
this period. 20
The extent of the reduction in variance available to the MVE roll strategy can be seen in panel
(d) of Figures 2 and 3. Here the variances associated with this strategy are plotted against event
time (in days). In contrast to the s-day roll strategy variances that are close to unity, the MVE
roll strategy variance levels are considerably lower than unity, with a peak occurring around eight
days prior to the FND. 21 The variance peak coincides with the maximum mean aggregate execution
quality level. Here the MVE roll strategy tends to be more concentrated (less diversied) in order
to achieve this level of mean execution quality, and thus delivers a higher variance. However, some
reduction in variance is possible because the location of the maximum mean aggregate execution
19As a linear transaction cost measure is considered (that is, the bid-ask spread), these results may underestimate
the ineﬃciency associated with strategies that roll on single days. This is because such strategies may also carry a
price impact cost that is not included in transaction costs.
20The MVE roll strategy is characterized by a diversied portfolio, with a large number of diﬀerent days used to
achieve the required mean aggregate execution quality level. However, the degree of diversication decreases around
the maximum mean aggregate execution quality day, with the number of diﬀerent days required reaching a minimum
around eight days prior to the FND. Further details regarding these characteristics are available on request.
21Note that the s-day and MVE strategies are equivalent in terms of mean aggregate execution quality as this is
an imposed constraint.
18
=== PAGE 20 ===
quality day varies over the replications of the data within the simulation (which, in turn, re
ects
the fact that the maximum mean aggregate execution quality day varies over the sample).
3.6. Practical roll strategies
The results presented thus far provide evidence that the MVE roll strategy oﬀers clear benets.
However, from a practical perspective, a number of challenges remain. Most importantly, it is not
clear how a trader would actually implement the strategy in the absence of accurate information
concerning the mean and variance of execution quality. An obvious case in point here would be the
inaccuracies associated with out-of-sample estimates of these moments.
The portfolio theory literature has recently proposed alternatives to the MVE approach that
avoid the need for moment estimates. In particular, DeMiguel et al. (2009) demonstrate that a
naive strategy based on investing equal amounts in each asset (referred to as the 1 =N portfolio
strategy) is not outperformed by a wide range of MVE-based strategies (including one in which
short sales are not permitted).
This practical method of diversication has also been adopted by commercial roll strategies
(albeit with a diﬀerent motivation). 22 In particular, the SP-GSCI and DJ-UBSCI are \rolling
indices" constructed under the assumption that commodity futures contracts roll (with uniform
weights) between the fth and ninth business days of the month preceding the expiration month
(that is, the Goldman roll), and between the sixth and tenth business days of the month preceding
the expiration month (that is, the UBS roll). These roll dates correspond to approximately twelve
to sixteen, and eleven to fteen days prior to the FND, respectively. 23
To examine the quality of these two approaches, we calculate the ineﬃciencies associated with
the Goldman and UBS roll strategies with respect to the MVE roll strategy. The results in Tables 3
and 4 indicate that the UBS and Goldman roll strategies are highly ineﬃcient with the distribution
of the ineﬃciency measure indicating that the benet of using the MVE roll strategy is always
22A diversied roll is typically used in order to minimise price impact eﬀects. However, there is an additional
benet in terms of execution quality risk reduction { a feature that is the focus of the current paper.
23The Goldman and UBS rolls are commonly used in practice. For instance, there are a number of exchange traded
funds (ETFs) that seek to track the SP-GSCI and DJ-UBSCI { each adopting the Goldman or UBS roll, respectively.
To give an idea of the scale of this activity it should be noted that the iShares S&P GSCI Commodity-Indexed Trust
has a market capitalization of $760,440,447 on September 10, 2015. This information was taken from the iShares
website on https://www.ishares.com/us/products/239757/ishares-sp-gsci-commodityindexed-trust-fund ac-
cessed on September 11, 2015.
19
=== PAGE 21 ===
above zero even with a posterior probability of 0.99.
The primary reason for the failure of the Goldman and UBS roll strategies is the location of
days on which the roll occurs with respect to the maximum execution quality day (see Figures
2 and 3). To address this shortcoming, we propose a multiple-day roll strategy in which the
trader equally spreads the roll centered on the maximum execution quality day. Two variants
are considered: strategies with weights equal to unity on the center point (the adaptive single-
day strategy ), and weights equal to one fth on each day around (and including) the center point
(the adaptive multiple-day strategy ). In both cases, to ensure real time consistency the maximum
execution quality day is estimated using an in-sample period, with the quality of the strategies
assessed using an out-of-sample period (ergo the `adaptive' adjective). In the subsequent analysis
we use the rst ten sets of event time as the in-sample period, and the remaining sets of event time
as the out-of-sample period.
Use of these strategies will ultimately lead to a mean-variance tradeoﬀ. When a roll occurs
exclusively on the center point, a high mean and variance is obtained. As the degree of roll
diversication increases, a lower mean and variance is obtained. Thus, this provides a choice to
the trading desk manager that they can optimize based on their risk preferences. For a manager
that seeks a high mean execution quality level (low risk-averse manager), a concentrated roll is
suitable. By contrast, for a manager seeking a low variance execution quality level (high risk-averse
manager), a diversied roll is best.
There is an addition benet from using the diversied strategy in that the estimation error
associated with the location of the roll is reduced. By spreading the roll one is more likely to capture
the true maximum execution quality day. This will ultimately lead to a lower mean performance
associated with the single-day strategy, such that it may be dominated by multiple-day strategy in
terms of mean and variance.
3.7. Economic signicance
To assess the economic signicance of two competing strategies (strategy A with respect to
strategy B), the distribution of  obtained using the Bayesian approach is provided in Table 5.
Here strategy A represents the adaptive single-day roll strategy, and strategy B represents the
adaptive multiple-day roll strategy. We consider  = f0:1; 0:3; 0:5; 0:7; 0:9g. As execution quality
20
=== PAGE 22 ===
is standardized, it follows that the performance fee is given in terms of execution quality standard
deviations. Space limitations motivate presentation of results based on bid-ask spread data only. 24
Insert Table 5 here
The results indicate that for trading desk managers with a mean focus (that is,  = 0 :9), the
mean performance fee is close to zero. That is, trading desk managers using strategy A do not
require a signicant amount to be as well oﬀ as strategy B users. As the preference for mean
switches toward a preference for variance (that is,  falls), the performance fee increases and
becomes economically signicant in terms of magnitude. Importantly, the performance fees are at
least positive with a posterior probability of 0.9, when  falls below 0.5. Thus, for a suﬃciently
risk-averse trading desk manager, the adaptive multiple-day roll strategy has (economic) value.
It is possible to use this framework to examine the relative quality of competing multiple-
day strategies. In particular, we calculate the performance fees associated with the Goldman
roll strategy (strategy A) and the adaptive multiple-day roll strategy (strategy B).25 Results are
provided in Table 6.
Insert Table 6 here
The results demonstrate that the mean performance fees are generally positive and economically
meaningful in magnitude. Thus, traders using the Goldman roll strategy require an economically
signicant level of compensation. Moreover, for mean-focused trading desk managers these perfor-
mance fees are at least positive with a posterior probability of 0.9. This result is consistent with
the observation that the Goldman roll strategy is centered on days with execution quality levels
that are signicantly below the maximum available. 26
24The assumption is maintained in the subsequent analysis. Results pertaining to the use of illiquidity ratio data
give similar results. These are available on request.
25Similar results are obtained when the Goldman roll strategy is replaced by the UBS roll strategy. These are
available on request.
26The Goldman roll strategy appears to improve for variance-focused trading desk managers (all markets except
wheat). As both strategies are based on the same number of roll days (that is, ve), and the variances of execution
quality are broadly similar over the extant roll days, then this result is due to lower rst-order autocorrelations
observed during the time in which the Goldman roll occurs (see panel (b) of Figure 2).
21
=== PAGE 23 ===
3.8. Intraday variation
The analysis thus far has assumed that traders roll their positions over the entire trading day.
To examine this supposition we repeat the analysis under the assumption that trading occurs
during more specic periods within the trading day. In particular, three intraday periods are
considered: viz., the early trading session (8.30am to 10.00am), the mid trading session (10.01am
to 12.00pm), and the late trading session (12.01pm to 1.15pm). The mean, autocorrelation (rst-
order) and variances associated with the single-day and MVE strategies applied to corn futures
data are plotted in panels (a), (b), (c) and (d) of Figure 4. In addition, the distribution of the
performance fee associated with corn futures, the adaptive single-day roll strategy (strategy A),
and the adaptive multiple-day roll strategy (strategy B), are summarized in Table 7. 27
Insert Figure 4 here
Insert Table 7 here
The plots in Figure 4 indicate that the means, autocorrelations and variances are similar across
the three intraday trading sessions, and are comparable to the plots associated with the full day
trading session. Moreover, the results in Table 7 indicate that performance fees are above zero
with posterior probability 0.95 for  levels below 0.5 { a result that is similar to that observed
previously. Thus, the results appear robust to variation in the time at which the trader rolls their
position within the trading day.
3.9. The Goldman roll revisited
The documented poor performance associated with the Goldman roll strategy, particularly
compared to the adaptive multiple-day roll strategy (see Table 6), requires further analysis. As
the degree of diversication across these strategies is equal, then the performance diﬀerence must
be due to the location of the roll in event time. Specically, the Goldman roll occurs too early. It
could be argued that this result is specic to grain futures markets with FNDs that occur late in
the month preceding the expiration month. However, there is nothing unusual about this timing
as many other commodity futures markets share similar FND dates. Indeed, for energy futures
27Results pertaining to the other grain futures markets give similar results. These are available on request.
22
=== PAGE 24 ===
such as heating oil futures (HO), the FND is the second business day after the last business day
of the month preceding the expiration month. Thus, for many commonly used commodity futures
markets the Goldman roll is likely to be mistimed.
The question that naturally arises from the above discussion is: are there any futures market
that are likely to be suited to the Goldman roll? The Goldman roll is centered on the seventh
business day of the month preceding the expiration month. Given the evidence presented above
that execution quality peaks around eight business days prior to the FND (see Figure 2), it follows
that we seek a futures market with an FND (or last trading day, LTD, if this is prior to the
FND) that occurs around the fteenth business day of the month preceding the expiration month.
With approximately twenty one business days in a month, then would like to consider a futures
market with an FND (or LTD) that occurs six business days before the last business day of the
month preceding the expiration month. Coﬀee and crude oil futures (KC and CL) traded on the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) and CME, respectively, possess this feature and are likely to be
suited to the Goldman roll.
To investigate the above conjecture we consider the Goldman roll within the context of the
coﬀee and crude oil futures markets. This examination is based on using coﬀee and crude oil
futures bid-ask spread data over the same period as used in the preceding analysis. 28 The results in
Figure 5 provide the mean, autocorrelation (rst-order) and variances plots associated with coﬀee
futures execution quality over event time. It is apparent that the peak in mean execution quality
now occurs around the same time as the Goldman roll (cf. the plots in Figures 2, 3 and 4). This
is simply because the FND is closer to the Goldman roll dates.
Insert Figure 5 here
To further examine the above issue, performance fees associated with the Goldman roll with
respect to the adaptive single-day and multiple-day roll strategies are calculated using coﬀee and
crude oil futures bid-ask spread data. The results in Table 8 indicate that the Goldman roll is no
worse than the competing strategies. This is in contrast to the results associated with other futures
markets in which the Goldman roll is notably inferior to the adaptive multiple-day strategy for
28Bid-ask spreads are calculated using time and sales coﬀee and crude oil futures data obtained from TickData,
Inc..
23
=== PAGE 25 ===
mean-focused traders (see Table 6). This evidence supports the hypothesis that the Goldman roll
appears to work eﬃciently for only a handful of (albeit important) futures markets.
Insert Table 8 here
4. Conclusions
In this paper a mean-variance framework applicable to traders' who roll their positions in
securities from short to longer-dated contracts is proposed. The empirical ndings are summarized
as follows:
1. There is a distinct inverted U-shaped pattern in execution quality in the 25-day period prior
to the FND, with a peak mean execution quality level observed around eight days prior to
the FND.
2. Rolls based on single days prior to the FND are likely to be ineﬃcient with respect to the MVE
strategy. One possible exception would be those strategies that roll close to the maximum
observed mean execution quality levels.
3. The performance of the one-size-ts-all Goldman and UBS roll strategies is generally poor
in comparison to competing roll strategies (though exemptions are documented) . This is
primarily because the former strategies are centered on days with mean execution quality
levels that are below the maximum available.
4. An adaptive multiple-day roll strategy that evenly spreads the roll around the maximum mean
execution quality day delivers lower mean execution quality levels, but with less execution
risk, in comparison to an adaptive single-day roll strategy. Indeed, for suﬃciently risk-averse
traders, the adaptive multiple-day roll strategy is shown to be preferable.
These results have obvious implications for a variety of participants in nancial markets. First,
for a trading desk manager overseeing traders with roll requirements (in turn under instruction
from a portfolio manager or stack hedger), it is not advisable to undertake a concentrated roll on
single days. Rather, a diversied roll strategy should be adopted (providing they are reasonably
risk-averse with respect to execution risk). Second, the results have implications for researchers
and nancial institutions who work in the area of index construction. For instance, the SP-GSCI
24
=== PAGE 26 ===
is constructed by implementing the Goldman roll. Consequently, those seeking to track this index
are likely to be exposed to too high a level of execution risk.
25
=== PAGE 27 ===
References
Almgren, R., Chriss, N., 2001. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk 3,
5{39.
Bertsimas, D., Lo, A., 1998. Optimal control of liquidation costs. Journal of Financial Markets
1, 1{50.
Bessembinder, H., Carrion, A., Tuttle, L., Venkataraman, K., 2012. Predatory or sunshine trad-
ing? Evidence from crude oil ETF rolls. Southern Methodist University Working Paper.
Bessembinder, H., Seguin, P., 1993. Price volatility, trading volume, and market depth: Evidence
from futures markets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 28, 21{39.
Bollerslev, T., Melvin, M., 1994. Bid-ask spreads and volatility in the foreign exchange market:
An empirical analysis. Journal of International Economics 36, 355{372.
Carchano, O., Pardo, A., 2009. Rolling over stock index futures contracts. Journal of Futures
Markets 29, 684{694.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., Uppal, R., 2009. Optimal versus naive diversication: How ineﬃcient
is the 1 =N portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies 22, 1915{1953.
De Roon, F., Nijman, T., Werker B., 2001. Testing for mean-variance spanning with short sales
constraints and transaction costs: The case of emerging markets. Journal of Finance 61,
721{742.
Engle, R., Ferstenberg, R., 2007. Execution risk. Journal of Trading 2, 10{20.
Fama, E., MacBeth, J., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of Political
Economy 81, 607{636.
Fleming, J., Kirby, C., Ostdiek, B., 2001. The economic value of volatility timing. Journal of
Finance 56, 329{352.
Forsyth, P., Kennedy, J., Tse, S., Windcliﬀ, H., 2012. Optimal trade execution: A mean quadratic
variation approach. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 36, 1971{1991.
26
=== PAGE 28 ===
Geweke, J., 1989. Bayesian inference in econometric models using Monte Carlo integration. Econo-
metrica 57, 1317{1339.
Gibbons, M., Ross, S., Shanken, L., 1989. A test of the eﬃciency of a given portfolio. Econometrica
57, 1121{1152.
Hamilton, J., Wu, J., 2015. Eﬀects of index-fund investing on commodity futures prices. Interna-
tional Economic Review 56, 187{205.
He, H., Mamaysky, H., 2005. Dynamic trading policies with price impact. Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 29, 891{930.
Kandel, S., Stambaugh, R., 1987. On correlations and inferences about mean-variance eﬃciency.
Journal of Financial Economics 18, 61{90.
Kandel, S., McCulloch, R., Stambaugh, R., 1995. Bayesian inference and portfolio eﬃciency.
Review of Financial Studies 8, 1{53.
Li, K., Sarkar, A., Wang, Z., 2003. Diversication benets of emerging markets subject to portfolio
constraints. Journal of Empirical Finance 10, 57{80.
Ma, K., Mercer, M., Walker, M., 1992. Rolling over futures contracts: A note. Journal of Futures
Markets 12, 203{217.
Mou, Y., 2011. Limits to arbitrage and commodity index investment: Front-running the Goldman
roll. SSRN Working Paper available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1716841.
Perold, A., 1988. The implementation shortfall: Paper versus reality. Journal of Portfolio Man-
agement 14, 4{9.
Roll, R., 1984. A simple implicit measure of bid/ask spread in an eﬃcient market. Journal of
Finance 39, 1127{1139.
Samuelson, P., 1965. Proof that properly anticipated prices 
uctuate randomly. Industrial Man-
agement Review 6, 41{49.
Schied, A., Schoeneborn, T., 2009. Risk aversion and the dynamics of optimal liquidation strate-
gies in illiquid markets. Finance and Stochastics 13, 181{204.
27
=== PAGE 29 ===
Smith, T., Whaley, R., 1994. Estimating the eﬀective bid/ask spread from time and sales data.
Journal of Futures Markets 14, 437{455.
Stoll, H., Whaley, R., 2010. Commodity index investing and commodity futures prices. Journal
of Applied Finance 20, 7{46.
Thompson, S., Waller, M., 1988. Determinants of liquidity costs in commodity futures markets.
Review of Futures Markets 7, 110{126.
Tse, S., Forsyth, P., Kennedy, J., Windcliﬀ, H., 2013. Comparison between the mean-variance
optimal and the mean-quadratic-variation optimal trading strategies. Applied Mathematical
Finance 20, 415{449.
Wang, X., Garcia, P., Irwin, S., 2013. The behavior of bid-ask spreads in the electronically-traded
corn futures market. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 96, 557{577.
28
=== PAGE 30 ===
T able 1 { The contemporaneous relations between execution quality and roll yield
Statistic
Methodology Dependent Variable coeﬀ. s.e. z-stat. p-value
(a) Corn Data
Pooled OLS Bid-Ask Spread 0:02 0:04 0:59 0:28
Illiquidity Ratio 0:03 0:04 0:99 0:16
Fama-MacBeth Bid-Ask Spread 0:02 0:06 0:37 0:36
Illiquidity Ratio 0:03 0:07 0:48 0:31
(b) Wheat Data
Pooled OLS Bid-Ask Spread  0:02 0:04  0:68 0:25
Illiquidity Ratio 0:02 0:03 0:70 0:24
Fama-MacBeth Bid-Ask Spread  0:02 0:07  0:36 0:36
Illiquidity Ratio 0:02 0:06 0:39 0:35
(c) Soybean Data
Pooled OLS Bid-Ask Spread 0:01 0:03 0:24 0:41
Illiquidity Ratio 0:03 0:03 1:01 0:16
Fama-MacBeth Bid-Ask Spread 0:01 0:05 0:15 0:44
Illiquidity Ratio 0:03 0:06 0:56 0:29
(d) Soybean Meal Data
Pooled OLS Bid-Ask Spread  0:07 0:03  2:56 0:01
Illiquidity Ratio  0:02 0:03  0:87 0:19
Fama-MacBeth Bid-Ask Spread  0:07 0:05  1:55 0:06
Illiquidity Ratio  0:02 0:05  0:46 0:32
(e) Soybean Oil Data
Pooled OLS Bid-Ask Spread 0:03 0:03 1:04 0:15
Illiquidity Ratio 0:01 0:03 0:18 0:43
Fama-MacBeth Bid-Ask Spread 0:03 0:04 0:93 0:18
Illiquidity Ratio 0:01 0:04 0:15 0:44
Notes: This table contains the estimated (mean) slope coeﬃcient, standard error, z-statistic and p-value associated with
a regression of each measure of execution quality on roll yield. The pooled OLS and Fama-MacBeth methodologies are
used to estimate these statistics with a Newey-West estimator employed to calculate the standard error in the case of
the latter methodology. The p-value examines the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcient equals zero.
29
=== PAGE 31 ===
T able 2 { MSFE ineﬃciencies (autoregressive and periodic eﬀects)
In-sample Size (w.r.t. full sample)
Variable Model Comparison Forecast Horizon 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%
(a) Corn Data
Bid-Ask Spread M0 v. M1 All 3:15 3:30 7:89 11 :76 11 :44
M1 v. M2 1  1:03 1:20 1:31 1:07 1:46
2 0:20 0:33 0:28 0:12  0:07
3  0:16  0:10  0:08 0:01 0:02
4  0:87  0:20 0:06  0:17  0:42
5  0:45  0:21  0:07 0:13 0:15
M1 v. M3 1  2:82 0:12 1:36 1:10 1:21
2  1:05 0:34 0:43 0:28  0:02
3  3:75  0:36 0:06 0:14  0:10
4  5:68  0:52 0:07  0:17  0:44
5  5:01  0:52  0:07 0:16 0:11
Illiquidity Ratio M0 v. M1 All 7:98 10 :24 11 :10 10 :66 7:92
Roll Yield M0 v. M1 All  3:08  0:20 0:19 0:24 2:12
(b) Wheat Data
Bid-Ask Spread M0 v. M1 All 19:75 25 :92 31 :46 30 :00 27 :86
M1 v. M2 1 8:24 8:03 4:21 6:92 7:35
2  0:44  0:12 0:27 0:36  0:20
3  2:91  1:31  1:38 1:20 0:60
4  0:58 0:41 1:25 1:88 2:38
5  0:74  1:59  0:10 0:15  0:45
Illiquidity Ratio M0 v. M1 All 51:91 61 :83 72 :09 73 :66 77 :37
Roll Yield M0 v. M1 All  14:63  3:81  0:17 4:78 2:50
(c) Soybean Data
Bid-Ask Spread M0 v. M1 All 6:21 5:50 7:29 8:82 4:58
M1 v. M2 1 6:61 6:91 8:97 11 :26 10 :52
2 4:14 3:12 4:82 4:36 5:68
3 1:17 1:37 1:35 1:23 1:51
4 0:31 0:20 0:06 0:21 0:87
5 0:09 0:12  0:22  0:12 0:12
Illiquidity Ratio M0 v. M1 All 19:01 19 :89 23 :75 24 :92 20 :98
Roll Yield M0 v. M1 All  5:00  6:24  1:45 1:56 0:42
(d) Soybean Meal Data
Bid-Ask Spread M0 v. M1 All 6:80 3:01 7:02 8:00 8:19
M1 v. M2 1 5:64 7:37 5:59 6:68 2:27
2 1:86 2:68 2:02 1:42 0:21
3 0:90 1:00 0:64 0:07  1:11
4  0:05  0:21  0:15 0:00  0:14
5  0:30 0:03 0:00  0:07 0:06
Illiquidity Ratio M0 v. M1 All 12:44 10 :76 13 :26 16 :09 13 :98
Roll Yield M0 v. M1 All  3:53 4:43 5:15  1:59  2:63
(e) Soybean Oil Data
Bid-Ask Spread M0 v. M1 All 9:37 13 :41 17 :00 16 :69 12 :05
M1 v. M2 1 4:04 6:29 4:49 3:26 2:68
2 0:77 1:21 0:56 0:26 0:74
3 0:65 0:91 0:54 0:18  0:33
4 0:05 0:03  0:17  0:41  0:25
5 0:13 0:04  0:25  0:08  0:06
Illiquidity Ratio M0 v. M1 All 19:78 20 :82 24 :50 29 :30 30 :56
Roll Yield M0 v. M1 All  12:90  9:26  2:97  5:39  2:44
Notes: This table contains the out-of-sample MSFE ineﬃciencies associated with the naive (M0), periodic (M1),
autoregressive-periodic (M2) and augmented autoregressive-periodic (M3) models. These are provided for bid-ask spread,
illiquidity ratio and roll yield forecasts based on various in-sample period sizes and forecast horizons. Ineﬃciencies are
given in percentage terms. 30
=== PAGE 32 ===
T able 3 { Strategy ineﬃciency (bid-ask spread data)
Statistic
Strategy MN SD IQR 50% 75% 90% 95% 99%
(a) Corn Data
1 (day(s) to FND) 6:70 1:86 2:31 6:45 5:40 4:59 4:15 3:41
4 4:93 1:94 2:45 4:83 3:64 2:55 1:93 0:84
8 1:70 1:70 1:90 1:25 0:49 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 6:37 2:01 2:45 6:19 5:06 4:10 3:46 1:97
16 5:27 1:69 2:07 5:11 4:15 3:34 2:84 1:72
24 7:11 2:00 2:49 6:85 5:73 4:85 4:35 3:39
Goldman Roll 2:06 0:71 0:89 1:96 1:55 1:26 1:10 0:84
UBS Roll 2:15 0:72 0:91 2:05 1:64 1:32 1:16 0:89
(b) Wheat Data
1 8:34 2:28 2:86 8:02 6:73 5:76 5:24 4:36
4 6:10 1:88 2:33 5:91 4:84 3:97 3:46 2:33
8 1:06 1:04 1:21 0:83 0:30 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 4:48 1:64 2:06 4:32 3:36 2:58 2:13 1:28
16 4:99 1:43 1:78 4:79 3:99 3:36 3:03 2:47
24 6:45 1:80 2:26 6:21 5:18 4:41 4:00 3:31
Goldman Roll 2:10 0:69 0:86 2:00 1:62 1:33 1:18 0:92
UBS Roll 1:99 0:67 0:83 1:89 1:52 1:24 1:09 0:84
(c) Soybean Data
1 7:52 1:44 1:88 7:38 6:51 5:80 5:41 4:74
4 4:19 1:40 1:86 4:15 3:23 2:46 2:01 1:08
8 0:94 0:64 0:79 0:86 0:50 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 3:85 0:83 1:09 3:78 3:27 2:86 2:62 2:19
16 4:19 0:86 1:12 4:11 3:59 3:16 2:93 2:53
24 5:22 1:04 1:35 5:12 4:49 3:98 3:71 3:22
Goldman Roll 1:43 0:36 0:47 1:39 1:17 1:00 0:90 0:74
UBS Roll 1:40 0:36 0:47 1:37 1:15 0:98 0:88 0:73
(d) Soybean Meal Data
1 5:46 0:97 1:28 5:38 4:78 4:29 4:01 3:53
4 3:53 1:23 1:65 3:50 2:69 1:98 1:58 0:72
8 1:12 0:79 1:00 1:03 0:57 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 3:74 0:88 1:14 3:71 3:15 2:65 2:35 1:76
16 3:90 0:74 0:97 3:85 3:39 3:01 2:80 2:41
24 4:63 0:84 1:11 4:56 4:04 3:61 3:38 2:96
Goldman Roll 1:37 0:32 0:41 1:34 1:14 0:99 0:90 0:75
UBS Roll 1:33 0:32 0:41 1:30 1:11 0:95 0:87 0:72
(e) Soybean Oil Data
1 5:96 1:05 1:37 5:87 5:22 4:69 4:39 3:87
4 3:99 1:05 1:36 3:99 3:31 2:69 2:31 1:55
8 0:97 0:72 0:95 0:88 0:44 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 3:53 0:92 1:20 3:51 2:92 2:40 2:09 1:50
16 3:77 0:72 0:94 3:72 3:27 2:91 2:70 2:33
24 5:46 0:98 1:28 5:38 4:77 4:29 4:01 3:53
Goldman Roll 1:37 0:32 0:42 1:34 1:14 0:98 0:90 0:75
UBS Roll 1:32 0:32 0:42 1:29 1:09 0:93 0:85 0:70
Notes: This table contains information relating to the distribution of the ineﬃciency measure  obtained using the Bayesian
approach applied to bid-ask spread data. Specically, the mean (MN), standard deviation (SD), interquartile range (IR),
and 50, 75, 90, 95, and 99 percentiles are provided. These ineﬃciencies are based on a comparison of the MVE roll strategy
with the s-day roll strategy in which the roll takes place on one day (day s) only, and the multiple-day Goldman and UBS
roll strategies.
31
=== PAGE 33 ===
T able 4 { Strategy ineﬃciency (illiquidity ratio data)
Statistic
Strategy MN SD IQR 50% 75% 90% 95% 99%
(a) Corn Data
1 (day(s) to FND) 9:15 2:46 3:07 8:81 7:42 6:36 5:80 4:86
4 6:67 2:41 2:94 6:53 5:13 3:81 2:93 1:11
8 1:70 1:57 1:91 1:34 0:54 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 3:11 1:26 1:57 2:95 2:24 1:68 1:36 0:77
16 5:25 1:49 1:86 5:05 4:21 3:56 3:22 2:66
24 8:44 2:27 2:85 8:13 6:84 5:87 5:34 4:48
Goldman Roll 1:76 0:61 0:76 1:67 1:33 1:08 0:95 0:74
UBS Roll 1:42 0:54 0:66 1:34 1:04 0:83 0:71 0:53
(b) Wheat Data
1 13:88 3:66 4:55 13 :37 11 :31 9:74 8:94 7:55
4 8:88 2:41 3:01 8:55 7:18 6:15 5:60 4:69
8 1:49 1:23 1:57 1:30 0:58 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 2:89 1:27 1:56 2:73 2:03 1:47 1:13 0:07
16 5:23 1:48 1:86 5:02 4:19 3:55 3:21 2:65
24 11:39 3:03 3:78 10 :95 9:25 7:96 7:29 6:15
Goldman Roll 2:00 0:68 0:84 1:90 1:52 1:24 1:09 0:85
UBS Roll 1:62 0:60 0:73 1:53 1:20 0:95 0:82 0:61
(c) Soybean Data
1 10:24 1:91 2:48 10 :06 8:90 7:97 7:46 6:59
4 6:34 1:49 1:87 6:28 5:39 4:59 4:06 2:81
8 0:84 0:62 0:80 0:77 0:40 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 3:05 0:74 0:96 2:99 2:54 2:18 1:97 1:61
16 4:53 0:93 1:21 4:45 3:88 3:43 3:18 2:76
24 8:06 1:53 2:00 7:91 6:98 6:24 5:83 5:14
Goldman Roll 1:48 0:37 0:49 1:44 1:21 1:04 0:94 0:77
UBS Roll 1:27 0:34 0:44 1:24 1:04 0:87 0:79 0:64
(d) Soybean Meal Data
1 6:70 1:15 1:51 6:60 5:89 5:31 4:99 4:42
4 4:40 1:19 1:50 4:38 3:65 2:97 2:54 1:52
8 1:08 0:71 0:95 1:03 0:58 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 3:33 0:72 0:94 3:28 2:83 2:46 2:24 1:87
16 4:69 0:84 1:11 4:62 4:09 3:67 3:44 3:03
24 7:28 1:24 1:63 7:18 6:41 5:78 5:44 4:84
Goldman Roll 1:51 0:34 0:44 1:48 1:27 1:10 1:01 0:85
UBS Roll 1:33 0:31 0:41 1:31 1:11 0:96 0:87 0:73
(e) Soybean Oil Data
1 8:56 1:43 1:88 8:44 7:56 6:82 6:43 5:74
4 5:78 1:07 1:38 5:71 5:05 4:50 4:19 3:52
8 1:22 0:88 1:21 1:15 0:57 0:00 0:00 0:00
12 2:51 0:74 0:96 2:47 2:01 1:61 1:37 0:85
16 4:04 0:74 0:97 3:98 3:52 3:15 2:94 2:59
24 8:58 1:44 1:89 8:46 7:57 6:85 6:45 5:75
Goldman Roll 1:21 0:29 0:39 1:19 1:00 0:86 0:78 0:65
UBS Roll 1:01 0:27 0:35 0:98 0:82 0:69 0:62 0:50
Notes: This table contains information relating to the distribution of the ineﬃciency measure  obtained using the Bayesian
approach applied to illiquidity ratio data. Specically, the mean (MN), standard deviation (SD), interquartile range (IR),
and 50, 75, 90, 95, and 99 percentiles are provided. These ineﬃciencies are based on a comparison of the MVE roll strategy
with the s-day roll strategy in which the roll takes place on one day (day s) only, and the multiple-day Goldman and UBS
roll strategies.
32
=== PAGE 34 ===
T able 5 { Performance fees (adaptive single-day roll strategy v. adaptive multiple-day roll strategy)
Statistic
Preference (1   ) MN SD IQR 5% 10% 50% 90% 95%
(a) Corn Data
0.1 (mean-focused) 0:26 0:24 0:20 0:58 0:47 0:24 0:05  0:01
0.3 0:44 0:61 0:29 1:08 0:79 0:34 0:12 0:05
0.5 0:78 1:76 0:54 2:19 1:49 0:52 0:18 0:07
0.7 1:54 4:43 1:17 4:75 3:13 0:94 0:25 0:00
0.9 (variance-focused) 5:47 17 :36 4:45 17 :62 11 :48 3:08 0:48  0:44
(b) Wheat Data
0.1  0:01 0:14 0:10 0:16 0:10  0:02  0:11  0:15
0.3 0:08 0:69 0:14 0:40 0:25 0:03  0:07  0:11
0.5 0:25 0:76 0:26 0:89 0:58 0:12  0:04  0:09
0.7 0:63 2:29 0:56 2:15 1:37 0:33 0:00  0:10
0.9 2:64 23 :93 2:13 8:31 5:43 1:37 0:17  0:20
(c) Soybean Data
0.1 0:13 0:14 0:18 0:37 0:31 0:13  0:04  0:09
0.3 0:34 0:18 0:22 0:66 0:57 0:32 0:13 0:08
0.5 0:71 0:31 0:37 1:27 1:10 0:66 0:38 0:31
0.7 1:58 0:65 0:77 2:79 2:41 1:46 0:89 0:76
0.9 5:92 2:50 2:89 10 :53 9:04 5:46 3:32 2:87
(d) Soybean Meal Data
0.1 0:15 0:14 0:19 0:39 0:33 0:15  0:03  0:08
0.3 0:37 0:18 0:23 0:69 0:60 0:36 0:16 0:11
0.5 0:77 0:30 0:37 1:31 1:15 0:74 0:43 0:36
0.7 1:71 0:63 0:77 2:86 2:52 1:62 1:00 0:86
0.9 6:37 2:39 2:90 10 :75 9:42 6:00 3:74 3:23
(e) Soybean Oil Data
0.1 0:06 0:10 0:13 0:22 0:18 0:06  0:06  0:10
0.3 0:20 0:12 0:15 0:41 0:36 0:19 0:05 0:02
0.5 0:46 0:20 0:25 0:81 0:71 0:43 0:23 0:18
0.7 1:06 0:42 0:51 1:83 1:60 1:00 0:59 0:50
0.9 4:06 1:57 1:91 6:94 6:09 3:81 2:32 1:97
Notes: This table contains information relating to the distribution of the performance fee  obtained using the Bayesian
approach. Specically, the mean (MN), standard deviation (SD), interquartile range (IR), and 5, 10, 50, 90, and 95
percentiles are provided. The performance fees are based on a comparison of the adaptive single-day roll strategy and the
adaptive multiple-day roll strategy.
33
=== PAGE 35 ===
T able 6 { Performance fees (Goldman roll strategy v. adaptive multiple-day roll strategy)
Statistic
Preference (1   ) MN SD IQR 5% 10% 50% 90% 95%
(a) Corn Data
0.1 (mean-focused) 0:20 0:12 0:12 0:38 0:33 0:21 0:08 0:03
0.3 0:19 0:22 0:14 0:40 0:34 0:20 0:04  0:04
0.5 0:16 0:44 0:19 0:50 0:39 0:18  0:07  0:24
0.7 0:10 1:56 0:35 0:81 0:54 0:15  0:38  0:75
0.9 (variance-focused)  0:24 4:41 1:27 2:41 1:42  0:02  2:02  3:43
(b) Wheat Data
0.1 0:50 0:11 0:11 0:65 0:61 0:50 0:38 0:34
0.3 0:50 0:21 0:13 0:70 0:64 0:50 0:37 0:31
0.5 0:51 0:37 0:17 0:84 0:72 0:50 0:31 0:20
0.7 0:54 0:79 0:30 1:23 0:94 0:52 0:15  0:10
0.9 0:65 4:13 1:07 3:30 2:16 0:57  0:79  1:75
(c) Soybean Data
0.1 0:33 0:09 0:12 0:48 0:45 0:33 0:21 0:17
0.3 0:28 0:10 0:13 0:44 0:41 0:29 0:15 0:11
0.5 0:20 0:14 0:17 0:40 0:36 0:21 0:02  0:05
0.7  0:01 0:26 0:31 0:35 0:28 0:02  0:33  0:47
0.9  1:01 0:94 1:09 0:26 0:00  0:89  2:18  2:69
(d) Soybean Meal Data
0.1 0:25 0:09 0:12 0:40 0:37 0:25 0:14 0:11
0.3 0:22 0:10 0:13 0:38 0:34 0:22 0:10 0:06
0.5 0:16 0:13 0:16 0:35 0:31 0:16 0:00  0:06
0.7 0:01 0:23 0:28 0:35 0:27 0:02  0:27  0:38
0.9  0:73 0:80 0:97 0:44 0:19  0:66  1:73  2:13
(e) Soybean Oil Data
0.1 0:29 0:08 0:11 0:42 0:39 0:29 0:18 0:15
0.3 0:27 0:09 0:11 0:41 0:38 0:27 0:16 0:13
0.5 0:24 0:11 0:14 0:41 0:37 0:24 0:10 0:06
0.7 0:17 0:19 0:23 0:46 0:39 0:18  0:06  0:15
0.9  0:18 0:66 0:79 0:82 0:59  0:15  0:99  1:30
Notes: This table contains information relating to the distribution of the performance fee  obtained using the Bayesian
approach. Specically, the mean (MN), standard deviation (SD), interquartile range (IR), and 5, 10, 50, 90, and 95
percentiles are provided. The performance fees are based on a comparison of the Goldman roll strategy and the adaptive
multiple-day roll strategy.
34
=== PAGE 36 ===
T able 7{ Intraday performance fees (adaptive single-day roll strategy v. adaptive multiple-day roll strategy)
Statistic
Preference (1   ) MN SD IQR 5% 10% 50% 90% 95%
(a) Corn Data: Early trading session (8.30am to 10.00am)
0.1 (mean-focused) 0:26 0:26 0:21 0:62 0:50 0:24 0:04  0:02
0.3 0:51 0:90 0:33 1:27 0:91 0:37 0:14 0:07
0.5 0:92 1:63 0:63 2:57 1:75 0:60 0:23 0:13
0.7 1:94 5:15 1:41 5:77 3:82 1:17 0:38 0:18
0.9 (variance-focused) 6:89 17 :27 5:27 21 :34 13 :89 3:92 1:02 0:28
(b) Corn Data: Mid trading session (10.01am to 12.00pm)
0.1 0:38 0:26 0:21 0:72 0:60 0:35 0:16 0:09
0.3 0:60 0:71 0:32 1:32 0:98 0:48 0:25 0:19
0.5 1:00 2:61 0:60 2:54 1:78 0:70 0:34 0:24
0.7 1:93 3:76 1:33 5:49 3:70 1:22 0:48 0:29
0.9 6:64 16 :84 5:06 20 :40 13 :39 3:83 1:05 0:35
(c) Corn Data: Late trading session (12.01pm to 1.15pm)
0.1 0:19 0:36 0:24 0:61 0:45 0:15  0:06  0:13
0.3 0:49 1:04 0:39 1:41 0:97 0:32 0:06  0:01
0.5 1:05 2:48 0:77 3:07 2:05 0:63 0:18 0:07
0.7 2:31 6:45 1:72 6:88 4:58 1:33 0:38 0:17
0.9 8:72 22 :09 6:63 26 :61 17 :54 4:88 1:32 0:55
Notes: This table contains information relating to the distribution of the performance fee  obtained using the Bayesian
approach applied to corn futures bid-ask spread data observed at various points within the trading day. Specically, the
mean (MN), standard deviation (SD), interquartile range (IR), and 5, 10, 50, 90, and 95 percentiles are provided. The
performance fees are based on a comparison of the adaptive single-day roll strategy and the adaptive multiple-day roll
strategy.
35
=== PAGE 37 ===
T able 8 { Performance fees (Goldman roll strategy robustness check)
Statistic
Preference (1   ) MN SD IQR 5% 10% 50% 90% 95%
(a) Coﬀee data: Goldman roll strategy v. adaptive single-day roll strategy
0.1 (mean-focused) 0:02 0:12 0:09 0:15 0:12 0:03  0:08  0:14
0.3  0:07 0:30 0:13 0:11 0:08  0:02  0:23  0:36
0.5  0:22 0:65 0:24 0:08 0:04  0:11  0:54  0:84
0.7  0:60 1:80 0:52 0:07  0:01  0:31  1:29  2:00
0.9 (variance-focused)  2:43 6:29 2:00 0:08  0:22  1:33  5:09  7:88
(b) Coﬀee data: Goldman roll strategy v. adaptive multiple-day roll strategy
0.1  0:05 0:04 0:04 0:01  0:01  0:05  0:09  0:11
0.3  0:06 0:11 0:05 0:01  0:01  0:05  0:11  0:14
0.5  0:07 0:16 0:07 0:05 0:01  0:06  0:16  0:22
0.7  0:10 0:38 0:13 0:15 0:06  0:08  0:28  0:43
0.9  0:26 1:62 0:48 0:71 0:36  0:16  0:95  1:51
(c) Crude oil data: Goldman roll strategy v. adaptive single-day roll strategy
0.1 0:11 0:08 0:10 0:24 0:21 0:11 0:02  0:01
0.3 0:01 0:08 0:11 0:14 0:11 0:01  0:10  0:13
0.5  0:18 0:11 0:15  0:01  0:04  0:17  0:32  0:37
0.7  0:61 0:20 0:26  0:31  0:37  0:59  0:87  0:97
0.9  2:78 0:74 0:94  1:73  1:92  2:70  3:74  4:10
(d) Crude oil data: Goldman roll strategy v. adaptive multiple-day roll strategy
0.1  0:01 0:04 0:06 0:06 0:05  0:01  0:06  0:08
0.3  0:02 0:05 0:06 0:05 0:03  0:02  0:08  0:10
0.5  0:05 0:05 0:07 0:03 0:01  0:05  0:12  0:14
0.7  0:12 0:08 0:11 0:01  0:02  0:12  0:23  0:26
0.9  0:46 0:28 0:36  0:03  0:13  0:45  0:82  0:94
Notes: This table contains information relating to the distribution of the performance fee  obtained using the Bayesian
approach applied to coﬀee and crude oil futures bid-ask spread data observed using various benchmark strategies. Speci-
cally, the mean (MN), standard deviation (SD), interquartile range (IR), and 5, 10, 50, 90, and 95 percentiles are provided.
The performance fees are based on a comparison of the Goldman roll strategy with adaptive single-day and multiple-day
roll strategies.
36
=== PAGE 38 ===
(a) Measure 1
-
2
L
6
L
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
A
B
C
D
E
B′
C′
D′



(b) Measure 2
-
2
L
6
L
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
A
B
C
D
E
B′
C′
D′
E′ 



Figure 1 { Performance measurement
This gure contains a graphical representation of two diﬀerent ways of calculating the variance reductions (for a xed mean
level) available to users of the MVE roll strategy.
37
=== PAGE 39 ===
(a) Mean
 (b) Autocorrelation
(c) Variance ( s-day strategy)
 (d) Variance (MVE strategy)
Figure 2 { Execution quality proles (bid-ask spread data)
This gure contains the mean, autocorrelation (rst-order), and variance of execution quality associated with all s-day and
MVE roll strategies during the 24-day window prior to the FND. All panels provide information based on all grain futures
observed over all trading periods.
38
=== PAGE 40 ===
(a) Mean
 (b) Autocorrelation
(c) Variance ( s-day strategy)
 (d) Variance (MVE strategy)
Figure 3 { Execution quality proles (illiquidity ratio data)
This gure contains the mean, autocorrelation (rst-order), and variance of execution quality associated with all s-day and
MVE roll strategies during the 24-day window prior to the FND. All panels provide information based on all grain futures
observed over all trading periods.
39
=== PAGE 41 ===
(a) Mean
 (b) Autocorrelation
(c) Variance ( s-day strategy)
 (d) Variance (MVE strategy)
Figure 4 { Execution quality proles (intraday variation)
This gure contains the mean, autocorrelation (rst-order), and variance of execution quality associated with all s-day and
MVE roll strategies during the 24-day window prior to the FND. All panels provide information based on corn futures bid-ask
spread data observed during various periods within each trading day.
40
=== PAGE 42 ===
(a) Mean
 (b) Autocorrelation
(c) Variance ( s-day strategy)
 (d) Variance (MVE strategy)
Figure 5 { Execution quality proles (coﬀee futures data)
This gure contains the mean, autocorrelation (rst-order), and variance of execution quality associated with all s-day and
MVE roll strategies during the 24-day window prior to the FND. All panels provide information based on coﬀee futures bid-ask
spread and illiquidity ratio data.
41