
=== PAGE 1 ===
Intraday Momentum: The First Half-Hour
Return Predicts the Last Half-Hour Return ∗
Lei Gao
Iowa State University
and
Yufeng Han
University of Colorado Denver
and
Sophia Zhengzi Li
Michigan State University
and
Guofu Zhou
Washington University in St. Louis †
First Draft: March, 2014
Current Version: December, 2015
∗We are grateful to Phil Dybvig, Campbell Harvey, Steve Hesto n, Ryan Israelsen, Andrew
Karolyi, Aditya Kaul, Naveen Khanna, Zhongjin Lu, Stefan Na gel, Matthew Ringgenberg, Ronnie
Sadka, Robert Stambaugh, Jack Vogel, Mao Ye, seminar partic ipants at Michigan State University,
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, Singapore Managem ent University, Southwestern Univer-
sity of Finance and Economics, University of Missouri, and W ashington University in St. Louis,
and conference participants at the 2014 Tsinghua Universit y Workshop, 2014 International Sym-
posium on Financial Engineering and Risk Management, 2014 F inancial Management Association
meeting, 2015 Mid-Atlantic Research Conference in Finance , 2015 ITAM Finance Conference, and
2015 NF A Conference for helpful comments.
†Correspondence: Guofu Zhou, Olin School of Business, Washi ngton University, St. Louis, MO
63130; e-mail: zhou@wustl.edu, phone: (314)935-6384.
=== PAGE 2 ===
Intraday Momentum: The First Half-Hour
Return Predicts the Last Half-Hour Return
Abstract
Based on high frequency data of the S&P 500 ETF from 1993 – 2013 , we document
an intraday momentum pattern: the ﬁrst half-hour return on t he market predicts the
last half-hour return. The predictability, both statistic ally and economically signiﬁcant,
is stronger on more volatile days, on higher volume days, on r ecession days, and on
major macroeconomic news release days. This intraday momen tum is also strong
for ten other most actively traded domestic and internation al ETFs, and two major
international equity index futures. Theoretically, the in traday momentum is consistent
with the trading behavior of informed traders.
JEL Classiﬁcation: G11, G14
Keywords: Predictability, Intraday, Momentum, Economic Value
=== PAGE 3 ===
Introduction
Since the seminal work of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), it has been well-known that winners
(losers) over the past six months to a year tend to continue to be w inners (losers) over the
next six months to a year. Griﬃn, Ji, and Martin (2003) show that mo mentum like this is
common in global stock markets. In addition to this cross-section m omentum, Moskowitz,
Ooi, and Pedersen (2012) and Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen ( 2013) recently ﬁnd evidence
that time series momentum, where past returns of an asset positiv ely predict its own future
returns, is pervasive across asset classes such as equities, bond s, and currencies. To the
best of our knowledge, however, almost all momentum studies are c onﬁned to the monthly
or weekly frequency. An open question is whether there is any mome ntum at the intraday
level. This question is of interest not only for examining the robustne ss of various momentum
strategies, but also for understanding intraday market eﬃciency and the role played by
daytraders including high-frequency traders.
In this paper, we provide the ﬁrst study on intraday momentum, co ntributing in a unique
way to the large literature of momentum studies. 1 Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that the ﬁrst half-
hour return on the market signiﬁcantly predicts the last half-hour return on the market. 2
We measure the market return by the actively traded S&P 500 ETF. The predictive R2 of
the ﬁrst half-hour return on the last half-hour return is 1.6%, a lev el matching or exceeding
a typical predictive R2 at the monthly frequency (see, e.g., Rapach and Zhou, 2013). If t he
ﬁrst half-hour return is combined with the twelfth half-hour retur n (the half-hour before
the last half-hour), the R2 increases further to 2.6%. We also ﬁnd that predictability rises
generally with volatility and volume. For instance, when the ﬁrst half- hour volatility is high,
the R2 increases to 3.3% for the combined predictors. The predictability is s tronger during
recessions and on days with certain major economic news. Finally, we observe that intraday
momentum is stronger on days when the ﬁrst half-hour returns ar e positive than on days
when the ﬁrst half-hour returns are negative.
For out-of-sample (OOS) predictability, the R2 is 1.2% using the ﬁrst half-hour return
as the only predictor, and 1.8% when this predictor is combined with th e twelfth half-hour
return predictor. Similar to the in-sample results, the OOS predicta bility is also greater
than those typically found at the monthly frequency. In terms of e conomic signiﬁcance,
predictability based on either the ﬁrst half-hour return alone or its combination with the
twelfth half-hour return can generate certainty equivalent gains of 6.35% and 6.44% per
annum, respectively, over ignoring the predictors for a mean-var iance investor with a risk
aversion of 5. In terms of market timing, the economic value is also su bstantial – the average
return of the timing strategy using the sign of the ﬁrst half-hour r eturn is 6.67% per annum
with a standard deviation of 6.19%. The Sharpe ratio is thus 1.08, whic h is remarkable
compared to a level of 0.29 of a daily Buy-and-Hold strategy which delivers an average return
of 6.04% per annum with a standard deviation of 20.57%. Moreover, t he outperformance
1For example, the latest number of Google citations of Jegadeesh an d Titman (1993) is over 7360.
2In a recent study, Lou, Polk, and Skouras (2015) examine the intr aday property of the cross-section
momentum of stocks. In contrast, we study here the time-series momentum of the market.
1
=== PAGE 4 ===
remains signiﬁcant even after accounting for transaction costs, which become increasingly
lower due to quote decimalization in 2001 and advances in trading tech nology. Overall, the
intraday momentum is both statistically and economically signiﬁcant ou t of sample.
What are the economic forces that drive the intraday momentum? T heoretically, Admati
and Pﬂeiderer (1988) show that informed traders will act strateg ically by timing their trades
for high trading volume periods, which occur during the ﬁrst and the last half-hours in
our context due to the well-known intraday U-shaped trading volum e pattern of the stock
market. Hora (2006) demonstrates further that an optimal tra ding strategy is to trade
rapidly at the beginning and at the end of the trading day, and trade more slowly in the
middle of the day. Therefore, suppose there are good economic ne ws in the ﬁrst half-hour,
informed traders are likely to bid up asset prices substantially. Then , in the last half-hour,
their continued buying is likely to push the price further up, yielding ou r observed market
intraday momentum. Moreover, this explanation is also consistent w ith the fact that the
market intraday momentum is stronger when the ﬁrst half-hour re turns are positive than
otherwise. In short, the trading behavior of informed traders ex plains the market intraday
momentum.
The market intraday momentum is also consistent with the trading be havior of day-
traders. Most major macroeconomic announcements, such as GD P and CPI, are released
prior to 8:30am Eastern time, one hour before stock market tradin g starts. There is in ad-
dition various overnight news. Hence, a substantial rise in the ﬁrst half-hour return is likely
due to good economic news. In response to such a rise, some daytr aders may go short to
provide liquidity to the market, but they will unwind their positions late r before the mar-
ket closes. Shefrin and Statman (1985), Odean (1998), Locke an d Mann (2000), Coval and
Shumway (2005), and Haigh and List (2005) all suggest that daytr aders can be subject to
the disposition eﬀect – they may be more reluctant to unwind losing po sitions than winning
ones. Thus, as many of them are doing so during the last half-hour, their trading is likely
to drive prices higher. The empirical evidence is consistent with this e xplanation. On a
day when the ﬁrst half-hour return is up substantially, the twelfth half-hour return is on
average positive, making those who procrastinate have to unwind in the last half-hour. This
also helps to understand the fact that the opening price on the follo wing day is on average
lower, which suggests that there is an adjustment of the price fro m the previous day’s buying
pressure in the last half-hour.
The intraday momentum is quite robust. It persists after account ing for reasonable
transaction costs and market microstructure noises. Its econo mic value is signiﬁcant for
various risk aversion parameters and leverage constraints. More over, it is not limited to the
S&P 500 ETF, but is also strong and signiﬁcant for ten other most ac tively traded ETFs.
These ETFs represent alternative stock indices, such as the Dow, the NASDAQ, and the
Russell 2000. They also cover ﬁnancial, real estate, bond and cer tain international equity
indices. Interestingly, perhaps due to their lower liquidity, the out- of-sample predictability
and the certainty equivalent gains on these ETFs are often greate r than those on the S&P500
ETF. Furthermore, the intraday momentum exists in two major inte rnational equity index
futures, the FTSE 100 and EuroStockXX 50. However, the intrad ay momentum does not
2
=== PAGE 5 ===
show up in major currency pairs or commodity futures. This is perha ps expected because,
unlike the stock market, the daily open and close for currency and c ommodity futures are
unclear because they are traded globally around the clock.
Our paper is related to the literature on intraday asset prices. Man y of the existing
studies have been focused on trading activity and volatility (see, e.g ., Chordia, Roll, and
Subrahmanyam, 2011; Corwin and Schultz, 2012). Heston, Koraj czyk, and Sadka (2010)
seem to be the only study that is closely related to ours. They ﬁnd a s triking pattern that
returns on certain individual stocks tend to be persistent at the s ame half-hour intervals
across trading days, and that this pattern can last for up to 40 tr ading days. In contrast
to their study, we analyze intraday market momentum, namely, the predictability of the
market’s ﬁrst half-hour return for the market’s last half-hour re turn on the same day.
Our work is also related to the literature on price discovery. Barclay and Warner (1993),
Chakravarty (2001), and Boehmer and Wu (2013) study how trad ing and traders of diﬀerent
types contribute to price discovery during a trading day and over lo nger horizons. Our paper
by comparison suggests that the price discovery process can tak e at least a full trading day
for the market to digest information, resulting in the intraday mome ntum.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides a de scription of the
data. Section 2 documents the intraday momentum both in- and out -of-sample, and its
property over volatility or volume regimes, and proposes two explan ations. Section 3 provides
an economic evaluation. Section 4 investigates its behavior over bus iness cycles and news
announcements. Section 5 examines the robustness of the result s and Section 6 concludes.
1 Data
The intraday trading prices of the actively traded S&P 500 ETF (tick er SPY) are from
the Trade and Quote database (TAQ) to compute half-hour retur ns. The sample period
spans from February 1, 1993 through December 31, 2013. We exc lude any trading days
with fewer than 500 trades. For major news releases, we obtain th e historical release dates
of the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index (MCSI) from the Univers ity of Michigan; the
historical release dates of the GDP estimate from the Bureau of Ec onomic Analysis; the
historical release dates of the CPI from the Bureau of Labor Stat istics; and the historical
release dates of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) minut es from the Federal
Reserve Bank. 3
Speciﬁcally, to examine the intraday return predictability, on any tr ading day t, we
calculate the ﬁrst half-hour return using previous day’s close price and the price at 10:00am
Eastern time, and then every half-hour (30-minute) returns fro m 10:00am to 4:00pm Eastern
3The website for historical MCSI releases is http://www.sca.isr.umich.e du/data-archive/mine.php,
for GDP releases is bea.gov/newsreleases/relsarchivegdp.htm, fo r Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics announcements is www.bls.gov/bls/archived sched.htm, and for FOMC minutes releases is
www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.
3
=== PAGE 6 ===
time, a total of 13 observations per day, from
rj,t = pj,t
pj− 1,t
− 1, j = 1, · · ·, 13, (1)
where pj,t is the price at the j-th half-hour, and pj− 1,t is the price at the previous half-
hour, for j = 1,... , 13. 4 Note that p0,t is the previous trading day’s price at the 13 th
half-hour (4:00pm Eastern time). That is, we use the previous trad ing day’s closing price
as the starting price in calculating the ﬁrst half-hour return on day t, i.e., p0,t = p13,t− 1, so
that the ﬁrst half-hour return captures the impact of informatio n released after the previous
day’s market close. To assess the impact of return volatility on retu rn predictability, we
also compute the volatility of the ﬁrst half-hour return in two steps . First, we calculate the
returns minute by minute within the ﬁrst half-hour. Then, we compu te the realized volatility
using the estimated one-minute returns within the ﬁrst half hour to obtain an estimate of
the volatility of the ﬁrst half-hour.
2 Intraday momentum
We ﬁrst run predictive regressions to uncover the intraday momen tum, and next investigate
its out-of-sample performance. Then we examine the impact of vola tility and volume on this
momentum. Finally, we provide two intuitive explanations.
2.1 Predictive regressions
Consider ﬁrst the simple predictive regression of the last half-hour return on the ﬁrst half-
hour return:
r13,t =α +βr1,t +ǫt, t = 1, · · ·,T, (2)
where r13,t and r1,t are the last half-hour return and the ﬁrst half-hour return on da y t,
respectively, and T is the total number of trading days in the sample.
The ﬁrst column of Table 1 reports the results. The ﬁrst half-hour return positively
predicts the last half-hour return with a scaled (by 100) slope of 6.9 4, statistically signiﬁcant
at the 1% level, and an R2 of 1.6%. Such a high predictive R2 is impressive, as almost all
typical predictors have lower R2’s (see, e.g., Rapach and Zhou, 2013).
The twelfth half-hour (i.e., the second-to-last half-hour) may aﬀe ct the last half-hour
return too if there is a strong price persistence during the day. Th e second column of
Table 1 reports the regression result using this predictor. It is clea r that the twelfth half-
hour return predicts the last half-hour return at the 1% signiﬁcan ce level with an R2 of 1.1%.
We later show that this predictability largely comes from the recent ﬁ nancial crisis period,
4Similar results are obtained using log returns.
4
=== PAGE 7 ===
while that of the ﬁrst half-hour return is always signiﬁcant whether there is a crisis or not.
Asr1 orr12 predictsr13 individually, it is of interest to examine wether they can predict
r13 jointly. The third column in Table 1 reports the predictive regression results using
both predictors. Surprisingly, the slopes are barely changed from their individual regression
values. Moreover, the R2 of 2.6% is roughly equal to the sum of the individual R2’s. The
evidence suggests that r1 andr12 are independent and complementary in forecasting the last
half-hour return.
The standard monthly momentum strategy is known to have perfor med poorly during
the recent ﬁnancial crisis. How well the intraday momentum perfor ms in this period is
an interesting question. Panel B of Table 1 reports the predictive r egression results from
December 2, 2007, through June 30, 2009. The predictive power o f r1 in fact becomes
stronger, with a larger slope of 13.6 and a higher R2 of 4.1%. Moreover, the two predictors
combined yield an amazingly high R2 of 6.9%, rarely seen anywhere else. It may be noted
that the predictive powers of r1 and r12 are complementary during the crisis period too.
As the performance during the crisis period is so remarkable, a legitim ate question is how
the crisis aﬀects the results of the whole sample period. Panel C of T able 1 addresses this
question. Excluding those crisis days, performance clearly become s much weaker. Although
r12 is less signiﬁcant, r1 remains a powerful predictor of r13 with a sizable R2 of 0.8%,
comparable to many good predictors at the monthly frequency. Th e combined predictors
yield a higher R2 of 1.1%. Therefore, similar to studies on other trading strategies, although
the predictability is time-varying due to, for example, the ﬁnancial c risis, there is no doubt
for the validity of intraday momentum over the entire sample period.
If the ﬁrst and the twelfth half-hour returns can predict the last half-hour return, a
natural question is whether any of the other ten half-hour retur ns can also predict r13. To
test the predictability of r2,r 3,..., andr11, we ﬁrst examine if any of them used alone predicts
r13 by performing a simple predictive regression analysis similar to Equatio n (2). Second, we
examine if the explanatory power of r1 and r12 on r13 remains after controlling for returns
over other half-hour intervals by running a multiple regression that regressesr13 onr1,r 2,... ,
and r12 simultaneously. To address the concern of data snooping, both sim ple and multiple
regression analyses are performed not only for SPY but also for te n other most heavily traded
index ETFs. 5 Table IA.1 and Table IA.2 in the Internet Appendix report the results . Across
all 11 ETFs, the predictability of r1 is always statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level, and
that of r12 is signiﬁcant except for TLT. In contrast, none of the other 10 ha lf-hour returns
can signiﬁcantly and consistently predict r13 across the board. In short, only the ﬁrst and
the twelfth half-hour returns can contribute to the intraday mom entum.
2.2 Out-of-sample predictability
Our previous intraday momentum analysis is based on the entire samp le (in-sample) estima-
tion. While in-sample estimation is econometrically more eﬃcient if regre ssions are stable
5Information on these index ETFs is detailed in Subsection 5.5 of Sectio n 5.
5
=== PAGE 8 ===
over time, the ﬁnancial crisis clearly destabilizes the estimation. At t he monthly frequency,
Welch and Goyal (2008) ﬁnd that many macroeconomic predictors s uﬀer from an instability
problem, and their predictability largely vanishes once predictive reg ressions are estimated
recursively out of sample (OOS). Thus, in-sample predictability does not necessarily imply
OOS predictability.
To assess whether the intraday momentum persists out of sample, we run recursive re-
gressions similar to other predictability studies at the monthly frequ ency. That is, to forecast
return at any time t, we use data only up to time t − 1. Starting the regression using re-
turns before January 3, 1998, we progressively add one more mon th of returns each time
to form the OOS forecasts. Following Campbell and Thompson (2008 ), Rapach, Strauss,
and Zhou (2010), Ferreira and Santa-Clara (2011), Henkel, Mart in, and Nardari (2011), and
Neely, Rapach, Tu, and Zhou (2014), among others, we use the OO SR2 to measure the OOS
predictability, deﬁned as:
OOS R2 = 1 −
∑ T
t=1(r13,t − ˆr13,t)2
∑ T
t=1(r13,t − ¯r13,t)2
, (3)
where ˆr13,t is the forecasted last half-hour return from the predictive regre ssion estimated
through period t − 1, and ¯r13,t is the historical average forecast estimated from the sample
mean through period t − 1. A positive OOS R2 indicates that the predictive regression
forecast beats the simple historical average.
Table 2 reports the results. When we use the ﬁrst half-hour retur n alone, the OOS R2
is 1.2%. When we use the twelfth half-hour return alone, the OOS R2 is 0.7%. When we
use both of them, the OOS R2 achieves its highest value of 1.8%. 6 The OOS R2’s match
or exceed those at the monthly frequency. As shown by Campbell a nd Thompson (2008)
for monthly returns and conﬁrmed later here, these levels of OOS R2 are of substantial
economic signiﬁcance.
2.3 Volatility
Given that ﬁnancial crisis is characterized by high volatility, earlier re sults during the crisis
period are a special case of how intraday momentum performs unde r high volatility. In
general, we can examine the impact of volatility by sorting all the trad ing days into three
groups (terciles): low, medium, and high, according to the ﬁrst half -hour volatility. For
brevity, we consider the case of joint predictors of r1 and r12 only.
Panel A of Table 3 reports the results. The predictability appears t o be an increasing
function of volatility. When the ﬁrst half-hour volatility is low, the pre dictability is minimal
with an R2 of 0.6% and an insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient for r1. At the intermediate volatility level,
theR2 rises to 1.0%, which is economically signiﬁcant, and the coeﬃcient of r1 becomes highly
6Stronger results are obtained if we start the regression in later pe riod. For example, the OOS R 2 is
2.08%, 1.19%, and 3.18%, respectively, if the regression is started a fter January 3, 2004.
6
=== PAGE 9 ===
signiﬁcant. Finally, when the ﬁrst half-hour volatility is high, the R2 increases more than
ﬁve times to as high as 3.3% compared to the low volatility case.
Overall, the intraday momentum seems highly related to volatility. The higher the volatil-
ity, the greater the predictability. This appears consistent with th e theoretical model of
Zhang (2006) that the greater the uncertainty, the stronger t he persistence of a trend. In
our context, the greater the volatility, the greater the likelihood t hat the ﬁrst half-hour trend
carries over to the last half-hour.
2.4 Explanations
Statistically, both the in- and out-of-sample analyses provide stro ng evidence on the intraday
momentum. From an economic point of view, an interesting question is to ﬁnd out what
economic forces drive it. We provide below two explanations.
Our ﬁrst explanation is based on the strategic trading of informed t raders. Admati and
Pﬂeiderer (1988) show theoretically that informed traders will time their trades for high
trading volume periods. With a diﬀerent preference speciﬁcation, H ora (2006) also shows
that an optimal trading strategy is to trade rapidly at the beginning and the end of the
trading horizon, and to trade more slowly in the middle of the day. Figu re 1A plots the
average trading volume of the S&P 500 ETF every half-hour. Both t he ﬁrst and the last
half hours have trading volume of close to 15 million shares, but the mid dle of the day
has only about 5 million shares. The plot has a perfect U-shape, cons istent with earlier
ﬁndings about intraday trading activity (see, e.g., Jain and Joh, 198 8). Now, according to
the theories, given good economic news, informed traders are likely to trade more actively
in the ﬁrst half hour and thus bid up the price substantially. In the las t half hour, they
become active again and then their continued buying is likely to push th e price up again.
Figure 1B shows that the U-shape trading volume pattern is strong er on high volatility days,
suggesting a stronger impact of informed trading as volatility rises. This is consistent with
our earlier ﬁnding that intraday momentum is greater under greate r volatility.
A direct assessment of the impact of volume on intraday momentum is given in Panel B
of Table 3. Because trading volume has recently exhibited an upward trend largely because
of substantially lower trading cost (Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanya m, 2011), we need to
control for the time trend eﬀect in studying the volume and intrada y momentum interaction.
To do so, we ﬁrst sort all trading days within each year into terciles b ased on the ﬁrst half-
hour trading volume, and then combine each volume tercile across all years to form the
three volume groups. The predictive regression results in Panel B c onﬁrm that the intraday
momentum is stronger when the ﬁrst half-hour trading volume is high er. The R2 increases
from 1.1% when trading volume is low to 2.3% when trading volume is at an in termediate
level, and then to 3.1% when trading volume is the highest.
Our second explanation is based on the trading behavior of daytrad ers. On a day when
the ﬁrst half-hour return is up substantially (e.g., due to overnight or early morning news),
some traders may expect price reversion and go short. As they will almost surely unwind
7
=== PAGE 10 ===
to go ﬂat before the market closes, some of them may wait to unwind in the last half-hour.
Due to the disposition eﬀect (see, e.g., Shefrin and Statman, 1985; Odean, 1998; Locke and
Mann, 2000; Coval and Shumway, 2005; Haigh and List, 2005), the y may be more reluctant
to unwind losing positions than winning ones. On the other hand, on da ys with a substantial
rise in price, the twelfth half-hour return is on average positive, ma king those who plan to
unwind during this period wait to do so until the last half-hour. There fore, there is likely even
more unwinding of losing positions than usual in the last half-hour. Co llectively, daytraders’
buying is likely to push the last half-hour return higher than otherwis e. Indeed, the opening
price on the following day is on average lower, suggesting an adjustm ent of the price from
the last half-hour buying pressure.
Both of our explanations provide an economic basis for the strong s tatistical evidence for
the intraday momentum that the ﬁrst half-hour return on the mar ket predicts the last half-
hour return on the market. Clearly, our explanations are limited in sc ope. Future research
is called for to develop more models in understanding the trading motiv es, risk factors and
the equilibrium factor risk premia.
3 Economic signiﬁcance
In this section, to explore the economic signiﬁcance of intraday mom entum, we use the ﬁrst
half-hour and twelfth half-hour returns as timing signals either indiv idually or jointly to
examine the performance relative to a passive strategy that alway s holds the market (SPY)
during the last half-hour. Then we use the predicted last half-hour returns from the OOS
recursive predictive regressions to assess the certainty equivale nt utility gains for a mean-
variance investor.
3.1 Market timing
How well a predictor performs in market timing is a way to assess the v alue of the predictor.
In our case, we use the ﬁrst and twelfth half-hour returns as a tim ing signal to trade the
market in the last half-hour. Speciﬁcally, we will take a long position in t he market at the
beginning of the last half-hour if the timing signal is positive, and take a short position
otherwise. It is worth noting that the position (long or short) is clos ed at the market close
on each trading day.
Consider ﬁrst the use of the ﬁrst half-hour return r1 as the trading signal. Mathematically,
the market timing strategy based on signal r1 on dayt will have a return in the last half-hour:
η(r1) =
{ r13, if r1 > 0;
−r13, if r1 ≤ 0. (4)
The formula is clearly similar when using r12 as the timing signal.
When using both r1 andr12 as the trading signal, we buy only if both returns are positive,
8
=== PAGE 11 ===
and sell when both are negative. Otherwise, we stay out of the mar ket. Mathematically, the
return is computed from
η(r1,r 12) =
{ r13, if r1 > 0 & r12> 0;
−r13, if r1 ≤ 0 & r12 ≤ 0;
0, otherwise.
(5)
3.1.1 Out-of-sample performance
Panel A of Table 4 reports summary statistics on returns generat ed from the three timing
strategies. When we use the ﬁrst half-hour return as the timing sig nal to trade in the last
half hour, the average return is 6.67% on an annual basis. 7 At ﬁrst glance, this does not seem
very high. To gauge the performance, we report three benchmar k returns. The ﬁrst is an
Always Long strategy where we always take a long position in the market at the be ginning
of the last half-hour and close it at the market close. The ﬁrst row in Panel B of Table 4
shows that the annualized average return of this strategy is only − 1.11%. Hence, the timing
strategy η(r1) outperforms this passive strategy substantially.
The second benchmark is a Buy-and-Hold strategy, where we simply take a long position
in the market from the beginning of the sample, and hold it until the en d of the whole
sample period. The results are reported in the second row of Panel B. The average return
is 6.04% per year, which is still below the average return delivered by t he timing strategy,
η(r1). Hence, 6.67% is remarkable, considering that we are in the market only for a half-hour
each trading day instead of six and half-hours each day or all the tim e.
The third benchmark is a Random Timing strategy, where we use a random coin ﬂip as
the trade signal for the last half hour. The last row of Panel B show s that the average return
is − 0.68% per year. Therefore, the good performance of the timing str ategyη(r1) is unlikely
to be random.
Of course, we have to take risk into consideration. The standard d eviation is 6.19%
per annum for the timing strategy η(r1), resulting in a Sharpe ratio of 1.08. In contrast,
the Always Long (Random Timing ) strategy has a comparable standard deviation of 6.21%
(5.79%), but a negative Sharpe ratio of − 0.18 (− 0.12). The long-term Buy-and-Hold strategy
has a much higher standard deviation of 20.57%, and a much lower Sha rpe ratio of 0.29.
Note that the timing strategy η(r1) also enjoys a high positive skewness of 0.90 (versus
− 0.46, − 0.16 and − 0.26 for the Always Long, Buy-and-Hold and Random Timing strategies,
respectively) and a kurtosis of 15.65, suggesting that it often deliv ers high positive returns.
Note that the timing strategy trades only for the last half-hour ev en though we annualize
the returns the same way as the daily return. However, since the t iming strategy is exposed
to market risk for only the last half-hour, its standard deviation is m uch lower and the Sharpe
ratio is much higher than daily returns. As the Sharpe ratio is not ver y informative when
7Even though we are only in the market for the last half-hour, we still annualize the returns multiplying
by a factor of 252 because we only trade once per day.
9
=== PAGE 12 ===
used to compare diﬀerent strategies, we adopt another perform ance measure, the Modigliani-
Modigliani measure (M2), which is related to the Sharpe ratio by
M2 = SRatio × σb +rf, (6)
where SRatio is the Sharpe ratio of the measured strategy, σb is the standard deviation of
the benchmark portfolio, and rf is the risk-free rate. Here we use the daily market return
as the benchmark and assume the daily risk-free rate is zero. The e conomic interpretation
of the M2 measure is that M2 is the average return of the measured strategy if the strategy
is leveled up (down) to have the same volatility as the benchmark port folio:
M2 = (µs − rf ) × σb
σs
+rf, (7)
where µs and σs are the average return and standard deviation of the measured s trategy.
Table 4 shows that the M2 of the timing strategy η(r1) is 22.16% per annum, which suggests
that this timing strategy would deliver an average return of 22.16% p er annum if the timing
strategy is leveled up to have the same risk (volatility) as the daily mar ket returns ( Buy-
and-Hold strategy), which yields only 6.04% per annum.
Finally, we report the success rate, which is deﬁned as the percent age of trading days with
zero or positive returns. The success rate of the Always Long strategy is 50.42%, suggesting
that the unconditional probability for the last half-hour returns is roughly 50-50. However,
the success rate of the timing strategy η(r1) is higher at 54.37%.
Using the twelfth half-hour return as the timing signal yields similar bu t weaker results.
The average return is about 1.77% per annum, Sharpe ratio is 0.29, s kewness is 0.38, kurtosis
is 15.73, and success rate is 50.93%. Overall, it still has a higher Sharp e ratio and a higher
M2 measure than the Always Long benchmark.
Combining the two returns, r1 and r12, delivers improved performance over using only
the twelfth half-hour return, but the performance is slightly weak er than using just the ﬁrst
half-hour return signal. For example, the average daily return is no w 4.39% vs. 6.67% per
annum, but the success rate is now much higher at an impressive valu e of 77.05%. This
means that combining both r1 and r12 does substantially improve the percentage of being
right. Then, why does higher success rate yield lower average retu rns? The reason is that,
when we combine the two signals, we take the long or short position on ly when both of them
are positive or negative, which substantially reduces the number of days when we are in the
market.8
8If we exclude the non-trading days with zero returns in the calculat ion, the strategy performs the best
as expected, with an annualized average return of 8.85%, a standa rd deviation of 6.36%, and thus a Sharpe
ratio of 1.39, a comparable skewness of 1.19, and a kurtosis of 18.30 .
10
=== PAGE 13 ===
3.1.2 Impact of volatility or volume
We have observed in the in-sample predictive regression analysis that the intraday momentum
is more pronounced on high volatility or volume days. To examine the imp act of volatility
on out-of-sample performance, we ﬁrst sort all trading days into terciles based on the ﬁrst
half-hour volatility and report the out-of-sample timing results in Pa nel A of Table 5.
Overall, Panel A shows that timing strategies based on return pred ictability outperform
the Always Long strategy under all scenarios, as is evident by higher average retu rns and
Sharpe ratios. By looking at the impact of volatility, we ﬁnd that the t iming performance
based on the ﬁrst half-hour return is much better when the ﬁrst h alf-hour volatility is higher.
The average return per annum (and its t-statistic) of the η(r1) strategy rises substantially
from 0.54% (0.43) in the low volatility group, to 4 .75% (2.27) in the medium volatility group,
and then to 14 .73% (3.80) in the high volatility group. The Sharpe ratio (M2 measure) also
rises from 0.18 (1.79% per annum) to 0.97 (15.48% per annum) and the n to 1.63 (49.30%
per annum). This enhanced out-of-sample performance of η(r1) on high volatility days is
consistent with the better in-sample explanatory power of r1 on high volatility days reported
in Panel A of Table 3. Combining the ﬁrst and twelfth half-hour retur ns as the timing signal
conﬁrms the positive interaction between the volatility and the pred ictability of the ﬁrst
half-hour return. Under the η(r1,r 12) strategy, both the average return and the Sharpe ratio
monotonically increase from the low to the high volatility groups.
Note that the ﬁrst half-hour return predicts the last half-hour r eturn both in sample
and out of sample. If the predictability is due to the strategic tradin g of informed traders,
as suggested by our ﬁrst explanation, we would expect the intrada y momentum eﬀect to
be stronger when the ﬁrst half-hour trading volume is higher. To te st this, we further form
tercile volume groups, similar to Panel B of Table 3, run an out-of-sa mple timing performance
analysis for days within each volume group, and report the results in Panel B of Table 5.
Comparing the three volume terciles in Panel B, we see that proﬁtab ility of the η(r1)
strategy improves both statistically and economically as the ﬁrst ha lf-hour trading volume
increases. The average return per annum (and its t-statistic) of the η(r1) strategy increases
from 1.67% (0.98) on low volume days to 6.46% (3.03) on medium volume da ys, and then
further to a much higher level of 11.87% (3.23) on high volume days. T he increase in the
Sharpe ratio (M2 measure) from 0.42 (5.64% per annum) to 1.29 (23.9 3% per annum) and
to 1.38 (37.67% per annum) of the η(r1) strategy also supports the implication that the
ﬁrst half-hour return predicts better on high trading volume days . Under the combined
signal strategy of η(r1,r 12), the average return rises from 2.10% per annum to 3.35% and
then to 7.73% across the low, medium, and high volume terciles. All in all, these ﬁndings
are consistent with the explanation that informed traders might tim e their trades for high
volume periods such as the beginning and the end of the trading day, thus inducing a positive
correlation between returns in the ﬁrst and last half-hours.
11
=== PAGE 14 ===
3.2 Mean-variance portfolios
Instead of using only the signs to form timing strategies, here we us e both the signs and
magnitudes of the predictors to forecast the expected returns . Then we apply these expected
returns to construct the optimal portfolio for a mean-variance in vestor who allocates funds
between the market (SPY) and the risk-free asset (the Treasur y T-bill).
The mean-variance eﬃcient portfolio weights are given as
wt = 1
γ
ˆr13,t+1
ˆσ2
13,t+1
, (8)
where ˆr13,t+1 is the forecasted last half-hour return on day t + 1 conditional on information
available at or before t and the predictor(s) at t + 1, and ˆσ13,t+1 is the standard deviation of
the last half-hour return, both of which are estimated from the re cursive regression; and the
relative risk aversion coeﬃcient, γ, is set at 5. To be more realistic, we impose the portfolio
constraint that weights on the risky asset must be between − 0.5 and 1.5, meaning that the
investor is allowed to borrow or short 50% on margin. This will limit the po tential economic
gains from the usual unconstrained weights. 9
Over the out-of-sample period, the realized utility is
U = ˆµp − γ
2 ˆσ2
p, (9)
where ˆµp and ˆσp are computed based on the realized portfolio returns. In the out- of-sample
forecasting literature, the historical average is usually the bench mark, and the certainty
equivalent gain of predictability is computed from
CER =U2 − U1, (10)
where U2 is the realized utility of using the forecasted return ˆ r13,t+1, and U1 is the realized
utility of using the historical average mean forecast. From an econ omic perspective, CER
can be interpreted as the gains of an investor who switches from be lieving in a random walk
model of the intraday prices to believing in intraday momentum.
The results are reported in Table 6. Using the ﬁrst half-hour retur ns to forecast the
last half-hour returns yields an average return of 6.85% per annum , a standard deviation
of 5.62% per annum, and thus a Sharpe ratio of 1.22, as well as large p ositive skewness
and kurtosis. In sharp contrast, using historical average ¯ r13 to predict the last half-hour
return only generates an average return of 0.46% per annum, a st andard deviation of 3.06%
per annum, and hence a Sharpe ratio of merely 0.15. The CER using th e ﬁrst half-hour
return is 6.35% per annum (the realized utility of using the historical a verage is only 0.46%),
indicating sizable economic gains when investors switch from following a random walk model
to following intraday momentum.
9The performance of the unrestricted portfolios is much stronger , which, although not reported for brevity,
is indicated in Table IA.4 in the Internet Appendix.
12
=== PAGE 15 ===
When both the ﬁrst and the twelfth half-hour returns are used to forecast the last half-
hour returns, the portfolio delivers the best result, with an avera ge return of 6.94% per
annum, a Sharpe ratio of 1.13, and a CER of 6.44% per annum. Note th at, unlike the case
with market timing, using both predictors is slightly better than using the ﬁrst half-hour
return alone. This is because we are now always in the market. It is ju st that the allocation
varies daily.
4 Macroeconomic events
In this section, we examine the performance of intraday momentum ﬁrst over business cycles,
and then on macroeconomic news releases.
4.1 Business cycles
We use the NBER dates for expansions and recessions to divide all tr ading days into these
two types, and ask whether the intraday momentum eﬀect interac ts with the business cycle.
We perform both in-sample predictive regression and out-of-samp le timing performance for
the two periods, and summarize the results in Table 7.
The comparison between these two periods suggests that intrada y momentum has a
more signiﬁcant impact during recessions than expansions. Panel A shows that, during
expansions, only the ﬁrst half-hour return can predict the last ha lf-hour return in sample.
Albeit statistically signiﬁcant, the predictability of r1 is relatively weak, with an R2 of 1.0%
when using r1 andr12 as joint predictors. During recessions, however, both the ﬁrst a nd the
twelfth half-hour returns are highly signiﬁcant, and the R2 increases more than six times to
6.6%. Such stronger predictability during recessions also translate s into higher proﬁts for
market timing. For example, Panel B shows that, using the ﬁrst and the twelfth half-hour
returns as the timing signal (strategy η(r1,r 12)), the average return of the timing strategy
in recessions is 16.79% per annum, seven times as high as 2.35%, the av erage return for
the expansion periods. As a result, the Sharpe ratio is 2.10 in the rec ession periods, more
than three times higher than the Sharpe ratio in the expansion perio d (0.66), despite the
high volatility of the strategy (8.01% versus 3.57%). The performan ce of the timing strategy
η(r1) also shows that the intraday momentum strategies perform bett er during recessions
than during expansions.
4.2 News releases
Previously, we have found that intraday momentum is stronger on d ays with higher volatility
or higher trading volume. One possible source of high volatility or trad ing volume may be
the release of major economic news. It is hence of interest how new s releases aﬀect intraday
momentum.
13
=== PAGE 16 ===
While there are many regular news releases, we here focus on four im portant news whose
release times span across diﬀerent time frames of the day. The ﬁrs t is the Michigan Con-
sumer Sentiment Index (MCSI), released monthly at 10:00am. The n ext two are the major
macroeconomic variables, the gross domestic product (GDP) and t he consumer price index
(CPI). Both of these are released monthly on pre-speciﬁed dates at 8:30am before the market
opens, like most other macroeconomic news. The last is the minutes o f the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC), released regularly at 2:15pm about ever y six weeks. We ana-
lyze the impact of the news releases by dividing all the trading days int o two groups: days
with news releases, and days without.
Panel A of Table 8 reports the performance of intraday momentum for the two groups of
trading days. On days without MCSI news, the R2 is 2.6%. On days with MCSI releases, the
R2 more than doubles to 5.5%. That is, the intraday momentum becomes stronger. The same
holds true when we compare the R2s on days without and on days with news announcements
for GDP and CPI. These results seem to suggest that there is an inf ormation carryover eﬀect
of the news on market prices during the whole trading day.
The most astonishing result is for the releases of the FOMC minutes. While the no-
release days have an R2 of only 2.5%, the R2 increases enormously to 11.0% on release
days. There are two reasons why this result is astonishing. First, t he R2 is high by any
standard, exceeding by far almost all predictors at the usual mon thly frequency. Second,
market participants seem to anticipate correctly in the ﬁrst half-h our the message the Fed
is going to send out to the market. Lucca and Moench (2015) ﬁnd th at pre-announcement
excess equity returns account for sizable fractions of total rea lized stock returns, which is
also a global phenomenon. Bernile, Hu, and Tang (2015) investigate market activity minutes
prior to the release of the FOMC minutes. Unlike these studies, we fo cus on the intraday
momentum. The high R2 indicates that, even after the FOMC news release, there is a stron g
tendency of the market to continue the trend of the same directio n anticipated in the ﬁrst
half-hour.
Will the higher R2s on the news release days imply greater economic gains? To answer
this question, we examine the performance of the earlier market tim ing strategies on days
with and without news release. Panel B of Table 8 reports only the re sults of using the ﬁrst
half-hour return, η(r1), for brevity. For the MCSI and CPI news, the gains are around th ree
times the gains on the days without news releases. For the GDP news , the proﬁts on release
days are about twice as much. The greatest economic gains are deliv ered on the release days
of the FOMC minutes. The annualized average return reaches a high level of 20.04%. This
is close to four times the level on days without FOMC news. Overall, th e performance of the
intraday momentum is much stronger economically on the days with th e four news releases.
5 Robustness
In this section, we examine the robustness of the intraday moment um on several dimen-
sions. First, we analyze the intraday predictability conditional on th e sign of the ﬁrst
14
=== PAGE 17 ===
half-hour return. Second, we examine whether the gains of the int raday momentum can
survive transaction costs. Third, we evaluate whether the intrad ay momentum is aﬀected
by microstructure noise. Further, we examine how the economic va lue measure may vary
for various parameters and constraints on the mean-variance po rtfolio. Finally, we explore
the evidence of intraday momentum on a set of the most actively tra ded ETFs, two popular
international equity index futures, and other asset classes such as currencies and commodity
prices.10
5.1 Conditional predictability
If either of our explanations holds, we would expect the intraday mo mentum to be con-
centrated mainly on days when the ﬁrst half-hour returns are pos itive, and perhaps to be
nonexistent when the ﬁrst half-hour returns are negative. We te st this implication by running
predictive regressions conditioning on whether or not the ﬁrst half -hour return is positive.
The results are reported in Table 9. During the whole sample period, t he R2s for the
three predictive regressions are 2.3%, 2.6%, and 4.5%, respectively , when the ﬁrst half-hour
return is positive. In sharp contrast, the R2s are only 0.5%, 0.3%, and 0.9% when the ﬁrst
half-hour return is negative. In addition, the ﬁrst half-hour retu rn, r1, is only marginally
signiﬁcant, and the twelfth half-hour return, r12, is insigniﬁcant. An even greater diﬀerence
is observed during the ﬁnancial crisis period – the R2s increase to 4.5%, 11.0%, and 14.1%,
respectively, for the three predictive regressions when r1 is positive. On the other hand, the
R2s are only 0.7%, 0.0%, and 0.9% when r1 is negative, respectively, and both r1 and r12
are insigniﬁcant. Finally, a similarly large diﬀerence is observed for per iods excluding the
ﬁnancial crisis. For example, using r1 as the predictor yields a R2 of 1.1% when r1 is positive
compared to 0.1% when r1 is negative. Neither r1 nor r12 is signiﬁcant conditional on r1
being negative.
The results suggest that intraday momentum is a phenomenon spec iﬁc to days when the
ﬁrst half-hour returns are positive, presumably because of good economic news, which is
consistent with the two explanations we have proposed.
5.2 Transaction costs
What are the impacts of transaction costs on our results? With tec hnological advancements
and ever increasing competition in the ﬁnancial industry, we have wit nessed a signiﬁcant
decline in transaction costs over the past decades. This trend bec omes even more evident
after decimalization of quotations.
We examine the impact of transaction costs on the proﬁtability of th e intraday momentum
using the market timing strategy as an example. To this end, we collec t from the TAQ
database the bid and ask prices at 3:30pm on each trading day and us e the ask (bid) price
10Our study focuses on the intraday time-series momentum of the ma rket or major indices. For the usual
cross-section momentum, see Griﬃn, Ji, and Martin (2003), Schwe rt (2003) and references therein.
15
=== PAGE 18 ===
to calculate the last half-hour return if the market timing strategy takes a long (short)
position.11 Since the closing of the SPY is uniquely traded at the market clearing p rice
for all the buys and sells, there will be no bid/ask spread eﬀect for t he price at 4:00pm. 12
Because of autoquotes of non-NYSE securities in the TAQ data bef ore decimalization, we
examine the eﬀect of transaction costs only after decimalization (a fter July 1, 2001). 13 The
results are reported in Table 10.
Panel A of Table 10 shows that, using the ﬁrst half-hour return as the timing signal,
the average return reduces to 4.46% per annum, 2.47% lower than t he average return before
transaction costs, while the standard deviation remains the same a t 6.10%. Nevertheless, the
proﬁts are still economically signiﬁcant. Indeed, from the M2 measu re, the strategy would
yield an average return of 14.88% per annum if leveled up to have the s ame volatility as
the daily returns. In contrast, the Always Long strategy which always invests in the market
during the last half-hour yields an M2 of − 2.45% per annum, and the daily market return
(Buy-and-Hold ) is 4.90% per annum for the same period. A slightly better result can b e
obtained when both the ﬁrst and the twelfth half-hour returns ar e used to time the market;
after adjusting for transaction costs, the average return is re duced by only 1.22% to 4.30%
per annum with an M2 of 19 .87%.
Figure 2 plots the time-series of the proportional spread after de cimalization (after July
1, 2001). It shows clearly that the proportional spread narrowe d after decimalization, and
stabilized at around 1.2 basis point after 2005. To more closely captu re the impact of
transaction costs on future performance of the intraday momen tum, we therefore consider
the performance after January 1, 2005, reported in Panel B of T able 10. The average return of
market timing using the ﬁrst half-hour return is 6.52% after transa ction costs compared with
7.96% before transaction costs. Similarly, the average return usin g both the ﬁrst and twelfth
half-hour returns is 4.74% after transaction costs versus 5.50% b efore transaction costs.
Again, the leveraged average return (M2) is 20.77% and 20.82% per a nnum, respectively,
much higher than the benchmark returns (-3.25% for the Always Long strategy and 6.75%
for the Buy-and-Hold strategy).
5.3 Microstructure noise
Bid-ask bounce is known to induce negative autocorrelation, espec ially the ﬁrst-order auto-
correlation in high-frequency returns. If the bid-ask bounce eﬀe ct is present in our data, it
11We measure the bid and ask prices at 3:30pm using the median bid and as k prices at 3:30:00pm. If there
is no quote at 3:30:00pm, we use the median bid and ask prices from the nearest previous second.
12We ignore the commission component of the transaction costs. At a n online broker, such as Tradestation,
an active individual investor may pay only $4.99 commission for trading thousands of shares. The cost to
active institutional investors can be even lower. In addition, some b rokers even provide retail investors
commission-free purchases and very low fees to sell.
13Autoquotes in the TAQ data are passive quotes by oﬃcial dealers wh o are not making the market. Such
quotes usually add a mechanical fraction on either side of the poste d primary market quote, and hence will
artiﬁcially inﬂate the quoted spread. The autoquotes issue is more s evere in the pre-decimalization period,
see Appendix B and Figure B-1 in Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (20 01).
16
=== PAGE 19 ===
would indeed bias against our ﬁndings, which are based on returns fo rmed from transaction
prices. This is because the negative autocorrelation due to bid-ask bounce could attenu-
ate the positive relation between r1 and r13 and even more likely between r12 and r13. To
gauge this impact, we re-estimate the main predictive regressions in Table 1 using bid-to-bid,
ask-to-ask, and midquote-to-midquote returns, and report th e results in Panels B through
D of Table IA.3 in the Internet Appendix. For completeness and to ea se comparison, we
also present the results using transaction price based returns (a s in Table 1) in Panel A
of the same table. 14 As expected, the predictive power of r12 increases when returns are
computed using bid, ask, or midquote prices over when returns are from transaction prices.
For example, for the whole sample period regressions using only r12 as the predictor, the
coeﬃcient (t-statistic) of r12 increases from 11.94 (2.62) using transaction returns to 13.49
(2.88) using bid-to-bid returns, to 13.18 (2.80) using ask-to-ask r eturns, and to 13.65 (2.90)
using midquote-to-midquote returns. The associated regression R2 also increases from 1 .1%
in Panel A to 1 .4% in Panel B, to 1 .3% in Panel C, and to 1.4% in Panel D. The impact of
bid-ask bounce on the predictive power of r1 is minimal, however, as the estimated coeﬃcient
and t-statistic of r1 stay largely the same across the four panels, and so does the R2. In
short, the intraday momentum pattern cannot be induced by the b id-ask bounce but could
actually be stronger after controlling for it.
5.4 Risk aversion and leverage
In Table IA.4 in the Internet Appendix, we examine the robustness o f the out-of-sample
mean-variance portfolio performance by varying the relative risk a version coeﬃcient, γ,
and/or imposing diﬀerent leverage restrictions on portfolio weights . For brevity, we con-
sider only portfolios based on forecasts from using both the ﬁrst a nd the twelfth half-hour
returns. In Panel A, we keep γ = 5 and change the portfolio weight restrictions. The ﬁrst
alternative restriction is no-short sell and no-borrowing ( ψ2 : 0 ≤ w ≤ 1.0), which is more
restrictive than the approach used in Table 6. Not surprisingly, the performance is poorer
with an average return of 3.22% per annum but a Sharpe ratio of 0.82 . The Sharpe ratio does
not drop much because of the lower volatility of the portfolio. Relaxin g the restriction by al-
lowing shorting (ψ3 : − 1.0 ≤ w ≤ 1.0) increases the average return but also the volatility. In
this case, the average return is around 7.35% per annum, CER is 6.61 % per annum, and the
Sharpe ratio is 1.26. Finally, we allow both shorting and borrowing ( ψ4 : − 1.0 ≤ w ≤ 2.0),
which delivers a much higher return (10.33% per annum), Sharpe rat io (1.19), and CER
(9.55% per annum).
In Panel B, we set γ = 2 and impose various portfolio weight restrictions, and in Panel
C, we allow γ to have a high value of 10. Overall, the results are very similar to Pane l A
where γ = 5. Of course, when no restriction is imposed, the average return and standard
deviation are diﬀerent for diﬀerent γ as expected, and the lower γ is, the higher the average
return and standard deviation are. But the Sharpe ratio should re main the same because
14The estimates in Panel A of Table IA.3 slightly diﬀer from those in Table 1 because we here exclude
days with fewer than one quote per half-hour to ensure the same s ample across Panels A through D.
17
=== PAGE 20 ===
they are all on the same eﬃcient frontier. Imposing portfolio restr ictions, on the other hand,
makesγ more or less irrelevant, and the portfolio performance is very close .
5.5 Other ETFs
Is the intraday momentum a special case for the S&P 500 ETF or a ge neral phenomenon
of the stock market? To address this question, we analyze the intr aday returns of ten
alternative ETFs. 15 We choose the ten ETFs with highest average daily trading volume
from their inception dates to December 31, 2013. 16 Table 11 describes these ETFs. The
asset classes are diverse. They include domestic alternative stock indices such as the Dow,
the NASDAQ, and the Russell 2000 (DIA, QQQ, and IWM); internatio nal equity indices
(EEM, FXI, EF A, VWO); two sector indices (XLF, IYR); and one bon d index (TLT). If the
intraday momentum found in SPY is also present in this diverse set of E TFs, it should lend
more support to our trading behavior explanations.
We evaluate both the statistical and the economic signiﬁcance of th e intraday momentum
in the same way as before. Table 12 reports the in-sample R2 and out-of-sample performance
measures for each ETF. 17 We see a consistent pattern: the ﬁrst half-hour return signiﬁcan tly
predicts the last half-hour return. Moreover, utilizing such predic tability generates substan-
tial economic values. When the ﬁrst half-hour return r1 is used alone as a predictor, the
in-sample R2 ranges from 1 .16% for DIA to 8 .54% for EEM, and the out-of-sample R2 is
from 0.70% for QQQ to 6 .53% for EEM. All the R2s strongly suggest that the ﬁrst half-
hour returns predict the last half-hour returns. In terms of eco nomic value, the CER can
be as high as 17 .71% per annum for FXI, and many are greater than 10.0%. In compa rison
with the S&P 500 ETF, these ETFs are less liquid, so the price impact of the last half-hour
trading is likely greater. This might help to explain their higher CERs in ge neral. Adding
r12 to r1 as an additional predictor, we ﬁnd a slight improvement over the sing le predictor
r1, but the improvement is not uniform. In short, the results for var ious ETFs indicate a
pervasive intraday momentum pattern in the stock market.
5.6 International Stock Futures
Another robustness analysis is to examine the intraday momentum in two other major in-
ternational stock markets. To this end, we obtain from OneMarke tData 30-minute intraday
price and volume information for FTSE 100 index futures (FT) and Eu roStockXX 50 index
futures (XX) from July 1, 2003 to October 31, 2015. 18 The trading hours of both futures
have extended several times during the sample period. The curren t trading hour is from
15For the S&P 500, using futures data instead of the S&P 500 ETF pro duces similar results.
16We exclude a couple of heavily traded ETFs, which yield similar results, w ith inception dates later than
2005 and a few others to have a diverse and manageable set of ETFs .
17We delete trading days with fewer than 100 trades.
18Due to limited resources, those are the only international intraday data we have. We use the data from
July 1, 2003 because, prior to this date, there is no volume informat ion.
18
=== PAGE 21 ===
1:00am to 9:00pm local time for FT futures and from 7:50am to 10:00pm local time for XX
futures, respectively.
However, trading activities are not evenly distributed over the ent ire trading day. Figure 3
plots the average trading volume every 30 minutes during the tradin g day for FT (Panel A)
and XX (Panel B) futures, respectively. For FT futures, trading volume suddenly increases
from almost zero and peaks at 8:30am (labeled as “1” in Panel A), simila r to the ﬁrst half-
hour trading ending at 10:00am for SPY in the US stock market. Late r in the afternoon, the
trading volume increases again and peaks at 4:30pm (labeled as “17” in Panel A), similar
to the last half-hour trading ending at 4:00pm for SPY. Between 8:30 am and 4:30pm, the
trading volume follows a U-shape, again, very much similar to the trad ing volume pattern
of SPY. Similar pattern is observed for XX futures but at diﬀerent t ime intervals. The
trading volume drastically increases in the half-hour ending at 9:20am (labeled as “1” in
Panel B), and then it peaks again at 5:50pm (labeled as “18” in Panel B ). These trading
volume patterns suggest that even though these index futures a re traded in extended hours,
traders/investors tend to trade with their regular working sched ule. Therefore we designate
8:30am (9:20am) as the “ﬁrst half hour”, and 4:30pm (5:50pm) as the “last half hour” for FT
(XX) futures, and calculate the ﬁrst half-hour return r1 for FF (XX) futures from 4:30pm
(5:50pm) of the previous trading day to 8:30am (9:20am) of the curr ent trading day, and the
last half-hour return from 4:00pm to 4:30pm (5:20pm to 5:50pm), den oted as r17 (r18).
Table 13 reports the results. Panel A and B report the in-sample an d out-of-sample
predictive regression results, respectively, and Panel C reports the performance of mean-
variance analysis. We denote the second to the last half-hour retu rn for FT (XX) futures
byr16 (r17). For FT futures, r16 is not signiﬁcant in the in-sample regression but signiﬁcant
(negative though) in the out-of-sample recursive regressions. H owever, the ﬁrst half-hour
return r1, is always signiﬁcant and positive. Using r1 as the only predictor, the in-sample
R2 is 1.90% and the out-of-sample R2 is 1.87%, respectively. Similarly, for XX futures, r1
is always signiﬁcant and positive both in sample and out of sample. The s econd to the last
half-hour return r17 is also signiﬁcant and positive.
Panel C evidences the economic value of intraday momentum in FT and XX futures.
For FT futures, the strategy that uses the ﬁrst half-hour retu rn to predict the last half-hour
return delivers an average return of 1.84% and a Sharpe ratio of 0.4 3, compared to − 0.72%
and − 0.29 of the strategy that uses the historical average (¯ r17) to predict the last half-hour
return. Similar results are obtained for XX futures. The intraday m omentum strategy uses
r1 (r1 andr17) delivers an average return of 2.47% (3.03%) and a Sharpe ratio of 0 .49 (0.61),
compared to 0.28% and 0.05 of the strategy using the historical ave rage (¯r18).19 Overall, it
is quite interesting that the intraday market momentum is not only co nﬁned in the US, but
also evident in the UK and in the Europe.
19The results are weaker than those for the US equity market proba bly due to the change of trading hours
over time, which adds noise to the deﬁnition of the ﬁrst and last half h our based on volume.
19
=== PAGE 22 ===
5.7 Currencies and Commodities
In this subsection, we further investigate the intraday momentum pattern beyond the stock
and stock futures markets by examining nine major currencies and two major commodities.
The nine currencies are Australia, Canada, Euro, Japan, New Zeala nd, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, all of which are also examined by Moskowitz, Ooi,
and Pedersen (2012). When these currencies are traded in the mo st liquid interbank cash
market against the US dollar, they are quoted conventionally either in their own currencies or
in US dollars: AUDUSD, USDCAD, EUROUS, USDJPY, NZDUSD, USDNOK, USDSEK,
USDCHF, and GBPUSD. We obtain the intraday prices of these nine cu rrency pairs from
a major brokerage ﬁrm. Most of the pairs are available from Novemb er 11, 2004, through
December 31, 2014, and the rest from January 6, 2005, through December 31, 2014. For
commodities, the most liquid market is the futures market. We obtain intraday crude oil
and gold futures prices from the same brokerage ﬁrm. The sample s pans from September
1, 2005, through December 31, 2014. On each trading day, we use only the front-month
contracts, i.e., the most traded and liquid ones.
Table 14 provides the results. For the currency pairs, the in-samp le R2s are in general
low and close to zero except for AUDUSD and USDJPY when using r1 as the only pre-
dictor. R2s are improved substantially with the additional predictor r12, suggesting strong
autocorrelations between r12 and r13 in currency markets. However, for the out-of-sample
tests, even lower and more negative R2s are observed. Again, this is especially true when r1
is the only predictor. Results are marginally better when r12 is added to the regression. In
addition, the CERs are small and even become negative in some cases . Similar results are
obtained for the commodities. R2s are essentially zero when r1 is used as the only predictor.
Overall, intraday momentum does not appear to exist in currency ma rkets or commod-
ity futures markets. These results are of no surprise, given the t wo explanations we have
proposed, which critically depend on the structure of the stock ma rket. In general, the
majority of stock market participants can trade only when the exc hanges are open from
9:30am to 4:00pm Eastern time, which helps generate the intraday mo mentum. Currency
markets, however, trade 24 hours a day and 7 days a week. There fore, traders do not have
to wait until the market opens, or close their positions before the m arket closes. Similarly,
even though commodity futures are still traded in the pit, electron ic trading of commodity
futures has become the dominant platform. Therefore, eﬀective ly, there are no open and
close of the markets, and traders can trade continuously.
On the other hand, if we deﬁne the ﬁrst and last half-hours for the currency pairs and
commodity futures based on trading volume similar to the internation al stock index futures,
we may ﬁnd strong evidence for intraday momentum. Unfortunate ly, volume information
is unavailable for the currency pairs and commodity futures. Howev er, we do see some
weak evidence of intraday momentum in the currency markets, par ticularly, for AUDUSD,
EUROUS, USDJPY, and USDSEK. This predictability of the ﬁrst half-h our return on the
last half-hour return could be due to an artiﬁcial open and close of t he markets. For example,
a large proportion of currency traders work for prop trading des ks of large US banks, and
20
=== PAGE 23 ===
most of their trades are submitted during regular working hours. W e have observed similar
pattern in the international stock index futures markets.
5.8 Data-snooping issues
Could our ﬁndings be caused by data snooping? 20 We argue that the intraday momentum
pattern is strong and persistent, and so it is unlikely be explained by c hance alone. First, the
intraday momentum shows that r1 is a powerful predictor. In Panel A of Table 1, the robust
t-statistics of r1 is 4.08, substantially exceeding the usual values of t-statistics between 2 and
3 seen in the return predictive regressions. Moreover, the in-sam pleR2 of 1.6% is exceedingly
high for an short-horizon return prediction problem. Such signiﬁca nt levels not only guard
against the false discovery (see, e.g., Harvey, Liu, and Zhu, 2015) , but also should bear
less discount or “haircut” due to backtesting biases (see, e.g., Har vey and Yan Liu, 2015).
Second, the performance of the intraday momentum is persistent throughout our sample,
and, as summarized in Tables 1–8, the intraday momentum consisten tly emerges under vastly
diﬀerent market conditions characterized by ﬁnancial crisis, volat ility levels, trading volume
levels, business cycles or macro news releases. Third, the intraday momentum is pervasive.
As shown in Sections 5.5 and 5.6, the predicative power of the ﬁrst ha lf-hour return on the
last half-hour return not only exists in SPY but also in a range of othe r most actively traded
ETFs and two major international stock futures. 21 In short, due to the plausible economic
explanations and strong statistical evidence, the intraday momen tum is likely to be a genuine
phenomenon.
6 Conclusion
On the stock market intraday returns, we document in this paper t hat the ﬁrst half-hour
return on the market predicts the market return in the last half-h our. This intraday pre-
dictability is statistically signiﬁcant both in- and out-of-sample. In te rms of market timing
and asset allocation, the economic gains of using the predictability ar e substantial. We also
ﬁnd that the market intraday momentum is stronger on high volatility days, high trading vol-
ume days, recession days, and important economic news (MCSI, GD P, CPI, FOMC) release
days. Moreover, the intraday momentum is strong not only for the S&P 500 ETF, but also
for ten of the most actively traded ETFs and two major internation al equity index futures.
Finally, intraday momentum is more signiﬁcant on days when the ﬁrst h alf-hour returns are
positive than otherwise. Theoretically, the market intraday momen tum is consistent with
the trading behavior of informed traders.
There are a number of open issues on intraday momentum. First, th e documented em-
20A related yet diﬀerent concern is the overﬁtting bias, which is a resu lt of using too many signals. Since
the intraday momentum relies on a single or two signals, the overﬁttin g issue is not relevant here.
21In fact, the ﬁrst draft of this paper only considered SPY, and the robustness results on other ETFs and
stock futures were found much later in responding to various helpf ul comments.
21
=== PAGE 24 ===
pirical facts in this paper call for new theoretical models of intrada y trading to explain
intraday momentum in a general equilibrium setting and to identify fac tors that determine
its risk premium. Second, as trading costs become increasingly lower and trading execution
becomes more automated, it is important to assess the asset pricin g implications of intraday
trading strategies and the associated implication for portfolio mana gement. Thirdly, there is
a huge literature on predictability at the monthly frequency, but it is unknown how intraday
predictability imply monthly predictability. These are interesting topic s for future research.
22
=== PAGE 25 ===
References
Admati, A. R., and P. Pﬂeiderer. 1988. A theory of intraday patter ns: Volume and price
variability. Review of Financial Studies 1:3–40.
Asness, C. S., T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen. 2013. Value an d momentum everywhere.
Journal of Finance 68:929–85.
Barclay, M. J., and J. B. Warner. 1993. Stealth trading and volatility : Which trades move
prices? Journal of Financial Economics 34:281–305.
Bernile, G., J. Hu, and Y. Tang. 2015. Can information be locked-up? Informed volume
and price variability trading ahead of macro-news announcements. Journal of Financial
Economics forthcoming.
Boehmer, E., and J. Wu. 2013. Short selling and the price discovery p rocess. Review of
Financial Studies 26:287–322.
Campbell, J. Y., and S. B. Thompson. 2008. Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
Can anything beat the historical average? Review of Financial Studies 21:1509–31.
Chakravarty, S. 2001. Stealth-trading: Which traders’ trades move stock prices? Journal of
Financial Economics 61:289–307.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam. 2001. Market liquidity and trading activity.
Journal of Finance 56:501–30.
———. 2011. Recent trends in trading activity and market quality. Journal of Financial
Economics 101:243–63.
Corwin, S. A., and P. Schultz. 2012. A simple way to estimate bid-ask s preads from daily
high and low prices. Journal of Finance 67:719–60.
Coval, J. D., and T. Shumway. 2005. Do behavioral biases aﬀect pric es? Journal of Finance
60:1–34.
Ferreira, M. A., and P. Santa-Clara. 2011. Forecasting stock mar ket returns: The sum of
the parts is more than the whole. Journal of Financial Economics 100:514–37.
Griﬃn, J. M., X. Ji, and J. S. Martin. 2003. Momentum investing and bu siness cycle risk:
Evidence from pole to pole. Journal of Finance 58:2515–47.
Haigh, M. S., and J. A. List. 2005. Do professional traders exhibit m yopic loss aversion? An
experimental analysis. Journal of Finance 60:523–34.
Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu. 2015. ...and the cross-section of e xpected returns. Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Harvey, C. R., and Yan Liu. 2015. Backtesting. Working paper, Duk e University.
23
=== PAGE 26 ===
Henkel, S. J., J. S. Martin, and F. Nardari. 2011. Time-varying shor t-horizon predictability.
Journal of Financial Economics 99:560–80.
Heston, S. L., R. A. Korajczyk, and R. Sadka. 2010. Intraday pa tterns in the cross-section
of stock returns. Journal of Finance 65:1369–407.
Hora, M. 2006. Tactical liquidity trading and intraday volume. Workin g paper, Credit Suisse
Group.
Jain, P. C., and G.-H. Joh. 1988. The dependence between hourly pr ices and trading volume.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23:269–83.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman. 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implica-
tions for stock market eﬃciency. Journal of Finance 48:65–91.
Locke, P. R., and S. C. Mann. 2000. Do professional traders exhib it loss realization aversion?
Working paper, Texas Christian University.
Lou, D., C. Polk, and S. Skouras. 2015. A tug of war: Overnight ver sus intraday expected
returns. Working paper, London School of Economics and Athens University of Economics
and Business.
Lucca, D. O., and E. Moench. 2015. The pre-FOMC announcement d rift. Journal of Finance
70:329–71.
Moskowitz, T. J., Y. H. Ooi, and L. H. Pedersen. 2012. Time series mo mentum. Journal of
Financial Economics 104:228–50.
Neely, C. J., D. E. Rapach, J. Tu, and G. Zhou. 2014. Forecasting t he equity risk premium:
The role of technical indicators. Management Science 60:1772–91.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West. 1987. A simple, positive semi-deﬁnite, h eteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55:703–8.
Odean, T. 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance 53:1775–
98.
Rapach, D., and G. Zhou. 2013. Forecasting stock returns. In G. Elliott and A. Timmer-
mann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting , vol. 2A, chap. 6, 328–83. North-Holland,
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rapach, D. E., J. K. Strauss, and G. Zhou. 2010. Out-of-sample e quity premium prediction:
Combination forecasts and links to the real economy. Review of Financial Studies 23:821–
62.
Schwert, G. W. 2003. Anomalies and market eﬃciency. In G. M. Cons tantinides, M. Harris,
and R. M. Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance , vol. 1, chap. 15, 939–74.
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
24
=== PAGE 27 ===
Shefrin, H., and M. Statman. 1985. The disposition to sell winners to o early and ride losers
too long: Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 40:777–90.
Welch, I., and A. Goyal. 2008. A comprehensive look at the empirical p erformance of equity
premium prediction. Review of Financial Studies 21:1455–508.
Zhang, X. F. 2006. Information uncertainty and stock returns. Journal of Finance 61:105–37.
25
=== PAGE 28 ===
Panel A: Average 30-Minute Trading Volume
0 5.0e+06 1.0e+07 1.5e+07
Volume
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Panel B: Average 30-Minute Trading Volume Under High and Low Volatility
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
0 5.0e+06 1.0e+07 1.5e+07
Volume
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Figure 1: Average 30-Minute Trading Volume of SPY
For every 30-minute period from 9:30am to 4:00pm Eastern tim e, Panel A shows the average
trading volume for SPY from February 1, 1993 through Decembe r 31, 2013. Each 30-minute period
is labeled from 1 to 13 sequentially. Panel B plots the same 30 -minute average trading volume on
high volatility (top tercile) and low volatility (bottom te rcile) days.
26
=== PAGE 29 ===
0 10 20 30 40
Proportional Spread (bp)
07/01/2001 07/01/2004 07/01/2007 07/01/2010 07/01/2013
Date
Time Series of SPY Proportional Spread at 3:30 pm
Figure 2: Time Series of Proportional Spread for SPY
This ﬁgure plots the proportional spread at 3:30pm on each tr ading day for SPY after decimalization
(after July 1, 2001). The proportional spread is deﬁned as (A sk − Bid)/ Midquote, where the
midquote price is the average of the bid and ask prices, (Ask + Bid)/ 2.
27
=== PAGE 30 ===
Panel A: Average 30-Minute Trading Volume for FT
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000
volume
−13−12−11−10 −9 −8 −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Panel B: Average 30-Minute Trading Volume for XX
0 20,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 100000
volume
−1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Figure 3: Average 30-Minute Trading Volume of FT and XX index futures
For every 30-minute period during trading hours, Panel A and B respectively show the average
trading volume for FT and XX index futures from July 1, 2003 th rough October 31, 2015. Each
30-minute period is labeled sequentially, with “1” denotin g the ﬁrst half hour for both panels, and
“17” (“18”) denoting the last half hour for Panel A (B).
28
=== PAGE 31 ===
Table 1: Predictability of the Last Half-Hour Returns
This table reports the results of regressing the last half-h our return ( r13) on the ﬁrst half-hour return ( r1) and the twelfth half-hour
return ( r12) of the day. The ﬁrst half-hour return ( r1) is calculated from the closing of the previous trading day a t 4:00pm to 10:00am
Eastern time. Panels A, B, and C show results for three period s: the whole sample period, the ﬁnancial crisis period from D ecember
3, 2007, through June 30, 2009, and the periods excluding the ﬁnancial crisis. The returns are annualized and in percenta ge, and the
regression coeﬃcients are scaled by 100. Newey and West (198 7) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5 %,
or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectively. The sample period is from February 1, 1993, through December 31, 2013,
excluding days with fewer than 500 trades.
Predictor r1 r12 r1 and r12 r1 r12 r1 and r12 r1 r12 r1 and r12
Panel A Panel B Panel C
Whole Sample Period Financial Crisis (12/2007–6/2009) Excluding Financial Crisis
Intercept -1.63 -1.33 -1.82 2.29 -1.66 1.36 -1.63 -1.25 -1.7 2
(-1.16) (-0.94) (-1.28) (0.29) (-0.20) (0.17) (-1.25) (-0. 97) (-1.31)
βr1 6.94∗∗∗ 6.81∗∗∗ 13.6∗∗∗ 13.2∗∗∗ 4.45∗∗∗ 4.40∗∗∗
(4.08) (4.14) (2.76) (2.88) (3.38) (3.36)
βr12 11.8∗∗∗ 11.4∗∗∗ 21.1∗ 20.2∗∗ 6.32∗ 6.13∗
(2.62) (2.60) (1.95) (1.99) (1.88) (1.83)
R2 (%) 1.6 1.1 2.6 4.1 3.1 6.9 0.8 0.3 1.1
29
=== PAGE 32 ===
Table 2: Out-of-Sample Predictability
This table examines the out-of-sample predictability of th e last half-hour return ( r13) by the ﬁrst
half-hour return ( r1) and the twelfth half-hour return ( r12) based on recursive estimations. The
window of the estimation initially uses observations up to D ecember 31, 1997, and progressively
includes one more month of returns. The out-of-sample predi ctability is measured by the out-of-
sample R-squared (OOS R2):
OOS R 2 = 1 −
∑ T
t=1(r13,t − ˆr13,t)2
∑ T
t=1(r13,t − ¯r13,t)2 ,
where ˆr13,t is the forecasted last half-hour return from the predictive regression estimated through
period t − 1, and ¯r13,t is the historical average return of the last half-hour estim ated through period
t − 1. The returns are annualized and in percentage, and the regr ession coeﬃcients are scaled by
100. Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5 %,
or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectively. The sample period is from February 1,
1993, through December 31, 2013, excluding days with fewer t han 500 trades.
r1 r12 r1 and r12
βr1 4.51∗∗∗ 4.38∗∗∗
(29.5) (29.2)
βr12 6.88∗∗∗ 6.59∗∗∗
(22.8) (22.2)
OOS R2(%) 1.2 0.7 1.8
30
=== PAGE 33 ===
Table 3: Impact of Volatility or Volume
This table reports the results of regressing the last half-h our return ( r13) on the ﬁrst half-hour
return ( r1) and the twelfth half-hour return ( r12), under diﬀerent levels of return volatility (Panel
A) or trading volume (Panel B) in the ﬁrst half-hour. The ﬁrst half-hour volatility is estimated
using one-minute returns within the ﬁrst half-hour period, and then all the trading days are ranked
into three terciles by their ﬁrst half-hour volatility: low , medium, and high. For trading volume, we
rank the trading days into low, medium, and high terciles by t heir ﬁrst half-hour trading volume
year by year to take into account the increasing trading volu me over time, and then combine each
volume tercile across all years to form three volume groups. The returns are annualized and in
percentage, and the regression coeﬃcients are scaled by 100 . Newey and West (1987) robust t-
statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% , or 10% level is given by an ***, an
** or an *, respectively. The sample period is from February 1 , 1993, through December 31, 2013,
excluding days with fewer than 500 trades.
Panle A: V olatility Panel B: V olume
Low Medium High Low Medium High
Intercept -2.18 ∗ -3.07 0.26 -4.36 ∗∗∗ 1.22 -2.27
(-1.76) (-1.51) (0.07) (-2.62) (0.58) (-0.66)
βr1 2.34 5.40 ∗∗∗ 7.20∗∗∗ 4.32∗∗ 7.22∗∗∗ 7.08∗∗∗
(1.03) (2.93) (3.76) (2.31) (3.32) (3.01)
βr12 8.81∗∗ 8.39∗∗ 12.7∗∗ 10.1∗∗ 6.16 13.7 ∗∗
(2.07) (2.29) (2.05) (2.11) (1.39) (2.05)
R2 (%) 0.6 1.0 3.3 1.1 2.3 3.1
31
=== PAGE 34 ===
Table 4: Out-of-Sample Market Timing
This table reports the economic value of timing the last half -hour market return using the ﬁrst half-
hour return, the twelfth half-hour return, or both jointly. For the timing strategy η(r1) ( η(r12)),
we use the sign of the ﬁrst (twelfth) half-hour return as the t iming signal – when the ﬁrst (twelfth)
half-hour return is positive (negative), we take a long (sho rt) position in the market. When both
returns are used jointly ( η(r1, r 12)), we trade only when both returns have the same sign – long
when both are positive and short when both are negative. The b enchmark Always Long is to invest
in the market during the last half-hour on each trading day, Buy-and-Hold is to buy and hold the
market on a daily basis, and Random Timing is to time the last half-hour return using the toss of
a coin as the signal. For each strategy, we report the average return ( Avg Ret), standard deviation
(Std Dev), Sharpe ratio ( SRatio), skewness, kurtosis, M2 measure, and success rate ( Success). The
M2 measure is estimated as the average return of the strategy wi th volatility leveled up to be
the same as the volatility of the daily Buy-and-Hold strategy. The returns are annualized and in
percentage. Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the
1%, 5%, or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respective ly. The sample period is from
February 1, 1993, through December 31, 2013, excluding days with fewer than 500 trades.
Timing Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis M2(%) Success(%)
Panel A: Market Timing
η(r1) 6.67 ∗∗∗ 6.19 1.08 0.90 15.65 22.16 54.37
(4.36)
η(r12) 1.77 6.20 0.29 0.38 15.73 5.88 50.93
(1.16)
η(r1, r 12) 4.39 ∗∗∗ 4.49 0.98 1.87 34.10 20.13 77.05
(3.96)
Panel B: Benchmark
Always Long -1.11 6.21 -0.18 -0.46 15.73 -3.69 50.42
(-0.73)
Buy-and-Hold 6.04 20.57 0.29 -0.16 6.61
(1.19)
Random Timing -0.68 5.79 -0.12 -0.26 16.79 -2.23
(-0.54)
32
=== PAGE 35 ===
Table 5: Impact of Volatility or Volume on Out-of-Sample Timing Performance
This table reports the impact of the ﬁrst half-hour volatili ty (Panel A) or trading volume (Panel B) on the economic value of timing
the last half-hour market return using the ﬁrst half-hour re turn ( r1), or the ﬁrst half-hour return and the twelfth half-hour ret urn ( r1
and r12). The timing strategy is described in Table 4. We report the t iming performance for three diﬀerent levels of the ﬁrst half- hour
volatility or volume. For each strategy, we report the avera ge return ( Avg Ret ), standard deviation ( Std Dev ), Sharpe ratio ( SRatio),
skewness, and M2 measure, which is the average return of the strategy with vol atility leveled up to be the same as the volatility of the
daily Buy-and-Hold strategy (not shown). The returns are annualized and in perc entage. Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are
in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectively. The sample period is from
February 1, 1993, through December 31, 2013, excluding days with fewer than 500 trades.
Panel A: V olatility Panel B: V olume
Timing Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis M2(%) Avg R et(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis M2(%)
Low V olatility Low V olume
Always Long -2.04 2.95 -0.69 -0.51 2.48 -6.80 -4.03 ∗∗ 3.98 -1.01 -0.78 6.08 -13.64
(-1.62) (-2.37)
η(r1) 0.54 2.95 0.18 -0.29 2.57 1.79 1.67 3.98 0.42 -0.54 6.30 5.64
(0.43) (0.98)
η(r1, r 12) 0.97 1.93 0.50 0.12 5.87 4.94 2.10 ∗∗ 2.53 0.83 1.08 13.25 11.14
(1.17) (1.93)
Medium V olatility Medium V olume
Always Long -2.36 4.89 -0.48 -0.25 2.83 -7.66 1.96 5.01 0.39 -0.02 3.94 7.23
(-1.13) (0.92)
η(r1) 4.75 ∗∗ 4.89 0.97 -0.14 2.91 15.48 6.46 ∗∗∗ 5.00 1.29 0.09 3.95 23.93
(2.27) (3.03)
η(r1, r 12) 3.78 ∗∗∗ 3.28 1.15 0.79 9.07 18.32 3.35 ∗∗ 3.50 0.96 0.74 14.09 17.68
(2.69) (2.24)
High V olatility High V olume
Always Long 1.05 9.10 0.12 -0.42 8.64 3.51 -1.29 8.63 -0.15 -0.44 10.84 -4.08
(0.27) (-0.35)
η(r1) 14.73 ∗∗∗ 9.06 1.63 0.76 8.50 49.30 11.87 ∗∗∗ 8.60 1.38 0.96 10.68 37.67
(3.80) (3.23)
η(r1, r 12) 8.42 ∗∗∗ 6.77 1.24 1.44 17.62 37.75 7.73 ∗∗∗ 6.45 1.20 1.63 21.00 32.69
(2.91) (2.80)
33
=== PAGE 36 ===
Table 6: Mean-Variance Portfolio Performance
This table reports the economic value of recursively predic ting the last half-hour market return
using the ﬁrst half-hour return or combining with the twelft h half-hour return. We use the predicted
returns to form a constrained mean-variance optimal portfo lio for a mean-variance investor with
a relative risk aversion of 5. Portfolio weights are restric ted to between -0.5 and 1.5. For each
strategy, we report the average return ( Avg Ret ), standard deviation ( Std Dev ), Sharpe ratio
(SRatio), skewness, kurtosis, and the certainty equivalent gain of return, CER, calculated as the
diﬀerence in the certainty equivalent rate of return between the optimal mean-variance strategy and
the benchmark (which uses the recursively estimated averag e returns of the last half hour returns
instead of the forecasted last half-hour returns). The retu rns are annualized and in percentage.
Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5 %, or
10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectively. The sa mple period is from February 1,
1993, through December 31, 2013, excluding days with fewer t han 500 trades.
Predictor Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis CE R(%)
¯r13 0.46 3.06 0.15 0.48 18.05 0.46
(0.57)
β1r1 6.85∗∗∗ 5.62 1.22 1.74 48.81 6.35
(4.55)
β1r1 + β2r12 6.94∗∗∗ 6.12 1.13 0.56 59.84 6.44
(4.23)
34
=== PAGE 37 ===
Table 7: Impact of the Business Cycle
This table reports the impact of business cycles on the predi ctability of the last half-hour return
(r13) by the ﬁrst half-hour return ( r1) and the twelfth half-hour return ( r12). The expansion and
recession periods are deﬁned by the NBER. Panel A reports the results of the predictive regressions,
while Panel B reports the results on the economic value of mar ket timing. The timing strategy
is described in Table 4. For each strategy, we report the aver age return ( Avg Ret ), standard
deviation ( Std Dev ), Sharpe ratio ( SRatio), skewness, and kurtosis. The returns are annualized
and in percentage, and the regression coeﬃcients in Panel A a re scaled by 100. Newey and West
(1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5 %, or 10% level is given by
an ***, an ** or an *, respectively. The sample period is from F ebruary 1, 1993, through December
31, 2013, excluding days with fewer than 500 trades.
Panel A: Predictive Regression
Predictor Intercept βr1 βr12 R2(%)
Expansion
r1 -2.34∗ 4.83∗∗∗ 0.9
(-1.76) (3.39)
r1 and r12 -2.41∗ 4.80∗∗∗ 4.32 1.0
(-1.80) (3.39) (1.26)
Recession
r1 5.42 11.4 ∗∗∗ 3.2
(0.89) (2.76)
r1 and r12 4.79 11.0 ∗∗∗ 21.6∗∗ 6.6
(0.78) (2.87) (2.30)
Panel B: Market Timing Performance
Timing Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis
Expansion
Always Long -1.73 5.05 -0.34 -0.03 8.53
(-1.29)
η(r1) 4.63 ∗∗∗ 5.04 0.92 -0.13 8.61
(3.44)
η(r1, r 12) 2.35 ∗∗∗ 3.57 0.66 0.26 23.26
(2.46)
Recession
Always Long 2.64 10.83 0.24 -0.65 8.10
(0.37)
η(r1) 19.05 ∗∗∗ 10.77 1.77 1.13 7.75
(2.70)
η(r1, r 12) 16.79 ∗∗∗ 8.01 2.10 1.96 15.88
(3.19)
35
=== PAGE 38 ===
Table 8: Impact of Macro News Release
This table reports the impact of macro news releases on the predict ability of the last half-hour market
return. Panel A contrasts the results of regressing the last half -hour return ( r13) on the ﬁrst and twelfth
half-hour returns ( r1 and r12) when there are macro news releases with those when there are no macro news
releases. Panel B reports the proﬁtability of timing the last half-ho ur market return using the ﬁrst half-hour
return, contrasting the days with certain macro news release with the days with no macro news release. The
timing strategy is described in Table 4. We report the average retur n ( Avg Ret ), standard deviation ( Std
Dev), Sharpe ratio ( SRatio), skewness, and kurtosis. MCSI: Surveys of consumer conﬁden ce by University of
Michigan release at 10:00 am Eastern time; GDP: monthly GDP estimate release at 8:30 am Eastern time;
CPI: monthly release of CPI at 8:30 am Eastern time; FOMC: Federal Open Market Committee minutes
release at 2:15 pm Eastern time. The returns are annualized and in pe rcentage, and the regression coeﬃcients
in Panel A are scaled by 100. Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance
at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectiv ely. The sample period is from
February 1, 1993, through December 31, 2013, excluding days wit h fewer than 500 trades.
Panel A: Predictive Regression
No-Release Release No-Release Release No-Release Release No-Rele ase Release
MCSI GDP CPI FOMC
Intercept -1.70 -7.16 -1.72 -6.75 -1.93 0.42 -1.49 -12.6
(-1.15) (-1.21) (-1.17) (-0.94) (-1.31) (0.06) (-1.03) (-1.61)
βr1 6.61∗∗∗ 14.4∗∗∗ 6.60∗∗∗ 11.7∗∗ 6.63∗∗∗ 10.4∗ 6.68∗∗∗ 14.4∗∗
(3.90) (3.40) (3.90) (2.37) (3.90) (1.95) (3.98) (2.35)
βr12 11.9∗∗∗ -5.51 12.0 ∗∗∗ -3.03 11.4 ∗∗ 11.7 10.9 ∗∗ 34.1∗
(2.64) (-0.48) (2.64) (-0.24) (2.56) (0.78) (2.51) (1.69)
R2 (%) 2.6 5.5 2.7 3.0 2.5 5.0 2.5 11.0
Panel B: Impact of Macro News Release on Timing Performance
Macro News Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis
Non-Release MCSI 6.05 ∗∗∗ 6.24 0.97 0.91 15.83
(3.83)
Release MCSI 19.09 ∗∗∗ 4.94 3.86 0.91 2.28
(3.41)
Non-Release GDP 6.28 ∗∗∗ 6.19 1.01 0.91 16.26
(4.01)
Release GDP 14.40 ∗∗ 6.14 2.35 0.83 3.41
(2.08)
Non-Release CPI 6.10 ∗∗∗ 6.21 0.98 0.91 16.11
(3.88)
Release CPI 18.03 ∗∗∗ 5.80 3.11 0.90 3.84
(2.75)
Non-Release FOMC 6.24 ∗∗∗ 6.20 1.01 0.90 15.88
(4.01)
Release FOMC 20.04 ∗∗ 5.84 3.43 1.07 7.22
(2.46)
36
=== PAGE 39 ===
Table 9: Conditional Predictability
This table reports the results of regressing the last half-h our return ( r13) on the ﬁrst half-hour return ( r1) and the twelfth half-hour
return ( r12) of the day conditioned on the sign of the ﬁrst half-hour retu rn. Panels A, B, and C show results for three periods: the
whole sample period, the ﬁnancial crisis period from Decemb er 3, 2007, through June 30, 2009, and the periods excluding t he ﬁnancial
crisis. The top panel reports the regression results when r1 is positive, while the bottom panel reports the regression r esults when r1 is
negative. The returns are annualized and in percentage, and the regression coeﬃcients are scaled by 100. Newey and West ( 1987) robust
t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5 %, or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectively. T he sample
period is from February 1, 1993, through December 31, 2013, e xcluding days with fewer than 500 trades.
Panel A Panel B Panel C
Whole Sample Period Financial Crisis (12/2007–6/2009) Excluding Financial Crisis
Predictor r1 r12 r1 and r12 r1 r12 r1 and r12 r1 r12 r1 and r12
When r1 > 0
Intercept -8.85 ∗∗ 4.56∗∗ -8.47∗∗ -14.2 21.7 ∗ -14.4 -5.70 ∗∗ 2.77 -5.62 ∗∗
(-2.52) (2.41) (-2.50) (-0.82) (1.82) (-0.91) (-2.16) (1.6 4) (-2.15)
βr1 11.3∗∗∗ 10.5∗∗∗ 21.0∗∗ 17.8∗∗ 7.41∗∗∗ 7.19∗∗∗
(3.63) (3.58) (2.15) (2.02) (3.60) (3.58)
βr12 18.4∗∗∗ 17.2∗∗∗ 41.9∗∗∗ 39.5∗∗∗ 7.49 6.93
(2.97) (2.85) (3.14) (2.98) (1.52) (1.44)
R2 (%) 2.3 2.6 4.5 4.5 11.0 14.1 1.1 0.4 1.5
When r1 < 0
Intercept -1.07 -8.27 ∗∗∗ -0.83 -5.07 -26.2 ∗∗ -2.82 -2.77 -5.90 ∗∗∗ -2.75
(-0.28) (-3.44) (-0.21) (-0.25) (-1.97) (-0.13) (-0.87) (- 2.81) (-0.86)
βr1 5.72∗ 5.90∗ 9.74 10.5 2.73 2.79
(1.73) (1.78) (1.19) (1.26) (0.89) (0.91)
βr12 6.60 6.93 7.78 8.98 5.45 5.53
(1.06) (1.11) (0.58) (0.66) (1.16) (1.16)
R2 (%) 0.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 0.2 0.3
37
=== PAGE 40 ===
Table 10: Market Timing with Transaction Costs
This table reports the economic value of timing the last half -hour market return using the ﬁrst half-
hour return or combining with the twelfth half-hour return, incorporating the transaction costs due
to the bid–ask spread. The timing strategy is described in Ta ble 4. The benchmark Always Long
is to always invest in the market during the last half-hour on each trading day, and the benchmark
Buy-and-Hold is to buy and hold the market on a daily basis. For each strateg y, we report the
average return ( Avg Ret), standard deviation ( Std Dev), Sharpe ratio ( SRatio), skewness, kurtosis,
and M2 measure, which is the average return of the strategy with vol atility leveled up to be the same
as the volatility of the daily Buy-and-Hold strategy. Panel A is for the period after decimalization
(after July 1, 2001), and Panel B is for the period when the spr ead is stabilized (after January 1,
2005). The returns are annualized and in percentage. Newey a nd West (1987) robust t-statistics
are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, or 10% leve l is given by an ***, an ** or an *,
respectively.
Timing Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis M2(%)
Panel A: After July 1, 2001
η(r1) 4.46 ∗∗∗ 6.10 0.73 1.21 19.82 14.88
(2.58)
η(r1, r 12) 4.30 ∗∗∗ 4.40 0.98 2.58 40.65 19.87
(3.44)
Always Long -0.74 6.12 -0.12 -0.53 20.06 -2.45
(-0.42)
Buy-and-Hold 4.90 20.34 0.24 -0.17 8.07
(0.85)
Panel B: After January 1, 2005
η(r1) 6.52 ∗∗∗ 6.51 1.00 1.42 20.48 20.77
(3.00)
η(r1, r 12) 4.74 ∗∗∗ 4.72 1.00 2.89 41.10 20.82
(3.01)
Always Long -1.03 6.54 -0.16 -0.54 20.78 -3.25
(-0.47)
Buy-and-Hold 6.75 20.72 0.33 -0.26 9.78
(0.98)
38
=== PAGE 41 ===
Table 11: Summary of Other ETFs
This table describes the ten index ETFs used for the robustne ss analysis in Table 12. These ETFs
are the most heavily traded ETFs as measured by their average daily trading volume from their
inception dates to December 31, 2013.
Symbol Name Inception
QQQ Powershare NASDAQ 100 03/10/1999
XLF Financial Select Sector SPDR 12/22/1998
IWM iShares Russell 2000 ETF 05/26/2000
DIA Dow Jones Industrial Average ETF 01/20/1998
EEM iShares MSCI Emerging Markets ETF 04/11/2003
FXI iShares China Large-Cap ETF 10/8/2004
EF A iShares MSCI EAFE ETF 08/17/2001
VWO Emerging Markets ETF 03/10/2005
IYR iShares U.S. Real Estate ETF 06/19/2000
TLT 20+ Year Treasury Bond ETF 07/26/2002
39
=== PAGE 42 ===
Table 12: Out-of-Sample Portfolio Performance – Other ETFs
This table reports the average return ( Avg Ret), standard deviation ( Std Dev), in-sample R2 (INS R2), out-of-sample R2 (OOS R2), and
CER, with the same analysis as Table 6 except replacing the marke t return by one of ten most heavily traded ETFs. All quantitie s are
in percentage, and returns and standard deviations are annu alized. Panel A reports the results using the ﬁrst half-hour return ( r1) to
forecast, and Panel B reports the results using both r1 and r12 to forecast. Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses,
and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level is given by an ***, a n ** or an *, respectively. The sample period for each ETF is fr om its
inception date to December 31, 2013, excluding days with few er than 100 trades.
Fund Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) INS R2(%) OOS R2(%) CER(%) Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) INS R2(%) OOS R2(%) CER(%)
Panel A: β1r1 Panel B: β1r1 + β2r12
QQQ 7.75 ∗∗∗ 7.89 1.43 0.70 7.38 8.34 ∗∗∗ 8.08 2.26 0.50 7.96
(3.65) (3.83)
XLF 12.04 ∗∗∗ 9.95 3.64 3.55 12.44 8.73 ∗∗∗ 9.70 4.37 2.19 9.13
(4.36) (3.24)
IWM 11.72 ∗∗∗ 7.70 2.51 2.43 11.72 12.12 ∗∗∗ 9.26 4.53 3.81 12.09
(5.18) (4.45)
DIA 3.46 ∗∗ 5.69 1.16 1.03 4.16 4.63 ∗∗∗ 6.40 2.25 1.81 5.31
(2.35) (2.79)
EEM 14.76 ∗∗∗ 9.01 8.54 6.53 14.69 18.46 ∗∗∗ 9.20 13.27 10.43 18.38
(4.91) (6.01)
FXI 18.42 ∗∗∗ 10.17 7.80 5.90 17.71 15.98 ∗∗∗ 10.54 10.42 7.52 15.26
(5.20) (4.35)
EF A 7.45 ∗∗∗ 5.82 3.53 1.90 7.18 6.53 ∗∗∗ 5.76 4.79 1.43 6.27
(4.16) (3.69)
VWO 12.18 ∗∗∗ 8.72 5.72 4.39 12.12 13.61 ∗∗∗ 8.83 8.45 6.29 13.55
(3.76) (4.15)
IYR 24.22 ∗∗∗ 12.29 5.29 4.60 14.98 29.80 ∗∗∗ 13.78 11.77 9.82 20.52
(5.86) (6.43)
TLT 4.03 ∗∗∗ 2.89 1.77 1.65 2.26 4.50 ∗∗∗ 2.71 1.81 1.51 2.73
(4.32) (5.14)
40
=== PAGE 43 ===
Table 13: Out-of-Sample Portfolio Performance – International
This table reports the results of using international index futures. Panel A reports the in-sample
predictive regressions results, while Panel B reports the o ut-of-sample predictive rolling regression
results. Panel C reports the performance of the mean-varian ce analysis. Returns and standard
deviations are annualized. Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and
signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectively. The sample
period is from July 1, 2003 through October 31, 2015.
Panel A: In-Sample Panel B: Out-of-Sample
Predictive Regression βr1 βr16 R2(%) βr1 βr16 R2(%)
FTSE 100 Index Futures
r1 4.93∗∗∗ 1.90 4.38 ∗∗∗ 1.87
(7.73) (25.15)
r1 and r16 4.93∗∗∗ -0.01 1.90 4.38 ∗∗∗ -1.09∗∗∗ 1.39
(7.71) (-0.01) (24.40) (-4.41)
EuroStockXX 50 Index Futures
r1 3.02∗∗∗ 0.84 3.12 ∗∗∗ 0.67
(5.17) (22.08)
r1 and r17 2.96∗∗∗ 2.75∗ 0.93 3.05 ∗∗∗ 3.59∗∗∗ 0.60
(5.05) (1.65) (21.56) (22.84)
Panel C: Mean-V ariance Performance
Variable Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) SRatio Skewness Kurtosis CER (%)
FTSE 100 Index Futures
¯r17 -0.72 2.48 -0.29 -1.54 19.43 -0.73
(-1.02)
β1r1 1.84 4.31 0.43 0.68 13.11 1.82
(1.49)
β1r1 and β2r16 1.67 4.29 0.39 0.79 11.69 1.65
(1.35)
EuroStockXX 50 Index Futures
¯r18 0.28 5.97 0.05 -0.28 5.69 0.24
(0.16)
β1r1 2.47∗ 5.04 0.49 -0.09 9.42 2.45
(1.72)
β1r1 and β2r17 3.03∗∗ 4.96 0.61 -0.09 9.76 3.00
(2.14)
41
=== PAGE 44 ===
Table 14: Out-of-Sample Portfolio Performance – Other Assets
This table reports the same analysis as in Table 12 except tha t the underlying asset is one of the 9 currency pairs, Austral ia, Euro, UK,
New Zealand, Canada, Switzerland, Japan, Norway and Sweden versus the US dollar, and two commodity futures, crude oil an d gold.
All quantities are in percentage, and returns and standard d eviations are annualized. Panel A reports the results using the ﬁrst half-hour
return ( r1) to forecast, and Panel B reports the results using both r1 and r12 to forecast. Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are
in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level is given by an ***, an ** or an *, respectively.
Fund Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) INS R2(%) OOS R2(%) CER(%) Avg Ret(%) Std Dev(%) INS R2(%) OOS R2(%) CER(%)
Panel A: β1r1 Panel B: β1r1 + β2r12
AUDUSD 1.34 2.45 0.69 0.31 1.57 3.13 ∗∗∗ 2.87 5.32 0.30 3.36
(1.51) (3.02)
EUROUS 0.66 1.31 0.34 0.05 0.87 0.50 1.33 2.82 1.44 0.71
(1.43) (1.07)
GBPUSD 0.46 1.19 0.14 0.02 0.24 0.46 1.30 2.39 0.45 0.23
(1.11) (1.01)
NZDUSD -0.34 2.57 0.03 -0.24 -0.05 1.84 3.13 4.04 0.73 2.12
(-0.35) (1.54)
USDCAD -1.26 ∗∗ 1.63 -0.01 -0.77 -1.12 -0.33 1.71 0.18 -1.32 -0.19
(-2.19) (-0.56)
USDCHF 0.43 0.94 0.20 -0.36 0.10 0.39 1.03 0.29 -0.31 0.05
(0.91) (0.74)
USDJPY 0.75 ∗ 1.30 0.82 0.28 0.86 0.66 1.25 1.69 0.16 0.77
(1.66) (1.51)
USDNOK 0.65 0.88 0.04 0.01 0.14 0.40 1.41 1.88 0.25 -0.11
(1.54) (0.59)
USDSEK 1.08 ∗ 1.36 0.25 0.09 0.81 -0.09 1.54 2.05 0.13 -0.36
(1.66) (-0.13)
OIL 1.05 3.10 0.01 -0.06 1.60 0.73 2.98 0.09 -0.78 1.28
(0.86) (0.62)
GOLD -0.20 3.31 0.05 -0.20 0.71 2.54 ∗∗ 3.07 3.33 2.82 3.45
(-0.15) (2.03)
42