
=== PAGE 1 ===
The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift
David O. Lucca and Emanuel Moench ∗
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
First Draft: September 2011
This Draft: February 28, 2013
Abstract
We document large excess returns on U.S. equities in anticipation of monetary
policy decisions made at scheduled meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) in the past few decades. The abnormal pre-FOMC returns have increased
over time and account for large fractions of total annual realized stock returns. While
other major international equity indices experienced similar pre-FOMC returns, we
ﬁnd no such eﬀect in U.S. Treasury securities and other ﬁxed income instruments.
Other U.S. macroeconomic news announcements also do not give rise to analogous
pre-announcement equity returns. The pre-FOMC return is higher in periods when
the slope of the Treasury yield curve is low, implied equity market volatility is high,
and when past pre-FOMC returns have been high. We discuss a few possible sources of
the pre-FOMC announcement drift, none of which appears to be fully consistent with
the vast empirical evidence that we assemble.
Keywords: FOMC announcements, equity premium, information choice
JEL classiﬁcation: G10, G12, G15
∗We are grateful to Tobias Adrian, Yakov Amihud, Nina Boyarchenko, John Cochrane, Richard Crump,
Itamar Drechsler, Darrell Duﬃe, Fernando Duarte, Thomas Eisenbach, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ken Kut-
tner(discussant), Michael Fleming, Charles Jones, Thomas Mertens, Lubos Pastor, Simon Potter, Asani
Sarkar, Ernst Schaumburg, Pietro Veronesi, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (discussant) Jonathan Wright and
seminar participants at the New York Fed, NYU Stern Finance, Deutsche Bundesbank, Banque de France,
the Swiss National Bank, NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, as well as the Boston University/Fed Conference
on Macro-Finance Linkages for useful comments. Steve Kang and Kirby Fears provided valuable research
assistance. Emails: david.lucca@ny.frb.gov, emanuel.moench@ny.frb.gov. The views expressed in the paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect views at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or
the Federal Reserve System.
=== PAGE 2 ===
1 Introduction
In the past few decades stocks in the U.S. and several other major economies have experienced
large excess returns in anticipation of U.S. monetary policy decisions made at scheduled
meetings. These returns are puzzling and diﬃcult to explain with standard asset pricing
models.
Members of the FOMC—the Federal Reserve’s (Fed) monetary policy-making body—convene
at pre-scheduled meetings to make monetary policy decisions. These meetings have occurred
eight times per year since the early 1980s, while before then, meetings were scheduled much
more frequently. Starting in 1994 the decisions of these meetings have been announced to
the public at known times, while before 1994, investors had to glean the outcomes indi-
rectly through the size of the open market operations conducted in the days following each
meeting.
We document that since 1994, the S&P500 index has on average increased 49 basis points
in the 24 hours prior to the FOMC announcements. The abnormal returns do not revert in
subsequent trading days and are orders of magnitude larger than those outside the 24-hour
pre-FOMC window. As a result, about 80 percent of the annual realized excess stock returns
since 1994 is accounted for by the 24 hours before FOMC announcements. The statistical
signiﬁcance of the pre-FOMC return is very high: a simple trading strategy of holding the
index only in the 24 hours leading up to an FOMC announcement would have yielded an
annualized Sharpe ratio of above 1.1. Other major foreign stock markets exhibit similarly
large pre-FOMC returns.
Before 1994 we study excess returns on days of scheduled FOMC meetings, which mark
the last trading session before investors could observe signals about the likely policy action.
Between 1980 and 1993, we ﬁnd results that are comparable to the post-1994 sample. For
example, pre-FOMC returns on the S&P500 index averaged to a statically signiﬁcant 20
basis points, while returns on other days were an order of magnitude smaller. We ﬁnd no
evidence of pre-FOMC announcement returns before 1980.
We show that the pre-FOMC returns since 1980 are not explained by outliers and that they
remain highly statistically signiﬁcant even when we account for data-snooping or small-
sample eﬀects. We ﬁnd pre-FOMC returns to be broad-based across U.S. industry and
size portfolios. Indeed, a single market factor model captures a signiﬁcant fraction of the
cross-sectional variation of these returns. Fixed income assets do not feature pre-FOMC
eﬀects, and other major U.S. macroeconomic news announcements do not give rise to pre-
announcement equity returns.
1
=== PAGE 3 ===
Based on one-year rolling averages, we ﬁnd the pre-FOMC drift to be positive for the vast
majority of the 1980-2011 sample. Pre-FOMC returns are somewhat countercyclical and
tend to be higher in periods when the slope of the Treasury yield curve is low, and when the
implied equity market volatility as measured by the VIX is higher. Even after accounting for
these factors pre-FOMC returns feature substantial serial correlation. Pre-FOMC returns
are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in easing versus tightening monetary policy cycles, and are
uncorrelated with the unexpected component of the yet-to-be-realized policy decision as
measured by the surprise component of federal funds rate futures (Kuttner [2001]) or the
stock market.
What explains these ﬁndings? The federal funds rate has trended down since the early 1980s,
reaching historically low levels at the end of the sample. In addition, interest rate policy
has sometimes been characterized as having an asymmetric impact on riskier asset values
through implicit ﬂoors, or so called “government puts” (for example, Diamond and Rajan
[2011]). Consistently, we ﬁnd that pre-FOMC returns are higher when the slope of the yield
curve implies future rate cuts and when the VIX is higher. If these were the true sources
of the drift, however, it is not clear why they would have impacted stock prices only in the
24 hours before the meetings, rather than on all days in the sample. Indeed, while FOMC
members regularly discuss monetary policy in speeches and interviews, they typically refrain
from any such discussion ahead of FOMC meetings (a time interval known as the purdah
period). In fact, we ﬁnd that realized stock market volatility and trading volumes are low
before and then jump at the time of the announcement.
One could argue that investors may be slow at updating their information sets on the basis
of theories featuring informational frictions such as Sims [2003]. In the paper we discuss how
a model with rationally inattentive investors (Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp
[2009]) can potentially generate price drifts ahead of scheduled announcements. However,
to quantitatively match the pre-FOMC returns, such a model would require agents to have
biased priors for long periods of time, which would be inconsistent with rational expecta-
tions. In addition, the learning process would likely result in higher trading volumes and
volatility in the hours before the announcement, contrary to what we observe in the data.
Similar arguments can be made regarding the model of political risk by Pastor and Veronesi
[2011], which, as we discuss in the paper, can also generate price drifts ahead of scheduled
announcements under certain conditions.
We consider several other candidate explanations. First, jumps are unlikely to be the source
of the drift as the pre-FOMC return accrues prior to the announcement when volatility is
low. Second, an explanation based on a purely consumption-based pricing kernel would
2
=== PAGE 4 ===
either require high-frequency movements in consumption or new information about future
consumption right before the FOMC. Third, previous work ﬁnds that negative innovations
in liquidity and volatility are associated with higher contemporaneous excess returns (Camp-
bell and Hentschel [1992] and Amihud [2002]). While we ﬁnd that the lower liquidity and
volatility ahead of the FOMC announcement can account for some of the pre-FOMC re-
turns, a large and signiﬁcant fraction remains unexplained. In addition, it is unclear to what
extent the declines in volatility and liquidity have been unexpected. Moreover, one would
need to rationalize these declines. In the paper, we discuss one such theory by Duﬃe [2010]
featuring time-varying stock market participation which is also capable of generating price
drifts ahead of scheduled announcements. However, this model appears to be at odds with
the absence of a return reversal on subsequent days, as well as with the absence of similar
drifts ahead of other macroeconomic announcements. Finally, we discuss that our empirical
evidence is at odds with an information leakage story along several dimensions.
In addition to the work cited thus far, our paper is related to diﬀerent strands of the lit-
erature. A vast literature has tried to explain the equity premium puzzle (see for example
Campbell [2003] for a review). Our paper documents that since the 1980s a large fraction
of realized excess returns on equities can be accounted for by returns in the 24 hours before
FOMC policy decisions become known, a ﬁnding that may help shed light on alternative
theories. A large literature has also studied asset price responses to monetary policy rate
decisions (e.g. Kuttner [2001]). 1 For U.S. equities, Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] document
large stock market responses to unexpected federal funds rate shocks. We see our results
as complementary to these studies as we document the existence of an unconditional excess
return that is earned ahead of the FOMC announcement. These returns are thus likely
driven by an anticipation rather than the realization of policy decisions. A related literature
has documented a sizeable conditional response of various asset classes to other economic
news announcements (Jones, Lamont, and Lumsdaine [1998], Fleming and Remolona [1999],
Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega [2003]). More recently, Savor and Wilson [2010]
ﬁnd positive excess equity returns on days of scheduled macroeconomic data releases, in-
cluding FOMC announcements, from 1958 through 2009. Our paper diﬀers from Savor and
Wilson [2010] as we study returns ahead of scheduled announcements while they look at
unconditional returns on announcement days. For the post-1994 sample, when FOMC an-
nouncements have been made at or a few minutes around 2:15PM, our results indicate that
the FOMC announcement day returns are driven by the pre-FOMC drift. Lamont and Frazz-
ini [2007] have recently documented a qualitatively similar upward drift of individual stock
1A more recent literature has also focused on ﬁnancial asset responses to communication about future,
rather than the actual realization of current, monetary policy actions (G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson [2005],
Lucca and Trebbi [2009])
3
=== PAGE 5 ===
prices prior to scheduled earnings announcements. While these authors focus on a behavioral
“attention grabbing” eﬀect as a potential explanation, we mainly consider theories based on
rational expectations. Nonetheless we stress in the paper that, due to the absence of new
public information ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements, informational frictions may
play an important role in explaining the drift. Recently, for example, Tetlock [2011] shows
that stale news can aﬀect stock prices. We discuss additional relevant literature along the
way.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief discussion of
the monetary policy decision process in the U.S. and reviews the data used in this paper.
In Section 3, we present the main empirical ﬁndings. Section 4 discusses a list of potential
explanations for our ﬁndings, and Section 5 concludes.
2 Federal Reserve Policy, FOMC meetings, and Data
2.1 Federal Reserve Policy and FOMC meetings
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, or Committee) is the monetary policy-making
body of the U.S. Federal Reserve System. The FOMC makes policy decisions under the
statutory dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. 2 Policy decisions are
made under a majority rule at FOMC meetings, which from 1981 through today have been
scheduled to occur eight times per year (or about once every six to eight weeks). Before
1981, scheduled FOMC meetings occurred much more often, ranging from a frequency of
about every three weeks in the 1960s to about every ﬁve weeks in 1980. 3
In this paper, we focus on those scheduled FOMC meetings. A list of the meeting dates
and announcement times since 1994 is reported in Table A.1. The FOMC can also meet at
other times in unscheduled meetings or conference calls. These meetings have been rather
infrequent, especially in the past two decades, and their occurrence is unknown to investors in
2The Committee is composed of twelve members: the seven members of the Board of Governors and
ﬁve of the twelve Reserve Bank presidents. The Federal Reserve Board Chairman also serves as the FOMC
Chairman. With the exception of the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who is a permanent
voting member and FOMC vice-Chair, presidents of all other Banks take voting positions on a rotating basis
that last one year.
3The calendar of past FOMC meetings and those already scheduled for the next year can be found at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Before Sep 11, 2001, the Public
Aﬀairs Division at the Board of Governors provided information sheets with the dates of scheduled meetings
to the public.
4
=== PAGE 6 ===
advance.4 Figure A.1 in the Appendix plots the evolution of the number of scheduled as well
as the total number of scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings since 1960. This chart
shows that monetary policy decisions in the U.S. have been made about twice as frequently
in the 1960s and 1970s compared to the 1980s.
Starting in February 1994 the FOMC began to announce its decisions and accompanying
statements (FOMC statements) after pre-scheduled meetings only when a change to the
current policy was made. Starting in May 1999, statements have been released after ev-
ery pre-scheduled meeting irrespective of whether a policy change occurred or not. From
September 1994 to March 2011, FOMC statements were regularly released at, or a few min-
utes after, 2:15pm ET following each scheduled meeting. 5 Since April 2011, the time of
the release has been 12:30pm on days of FOMC meetings, after which a press conference
by the FOMC Chairman is held at 2:15pm. Our intraday analysis focuses on the sample
from September 1994 through March 2011 over which FOMC releases were known to be
consistently made at, or within a few minutes of, 2:15pm, as reported in Table A.1.
Prior to 1994, the FOMC did not disclose its policy decisions and market participants gen-
erally inferred the target federal funds rate from the size of open market operations on the
days following the FOMC meeting. This often left investors with considerable uncertainty
as to what the actual decision had been for a few days (Kuttner [2003]). On the other hand,
on a few occasions before 1994, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve coincidentally
released statements about a decision to change the discount rate on days of scheduled FOMC
meetings. From these announcements market participants could have correctly inferred a
change in the federal funds rate or non-borrowed reserve target (see e.g. Kuttner [2001] and
G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson [2005] for a set of these dates in the post-1989 sample). We
obtained the full history of discount rate press releases from the Federal Reserve;s historical
records and identiﬁed a total of four FOMC meeting days in the 1960-2011 period when dis-
count rate announcements occurred on the day of a scheduled FOMC meeting. We exclude
those days from our analysis in order to ensure that the pre-FOMC windows do not include
any policy announcements. 6
4Unscheduled meetings typically occur via teleconference and are known to investors right after the
meeting only when a target rate change occurs. Since 1994, such meetings have occurred on the following
dates: April 18, 1994, October 15, 1998, January 3, 2001, September 17, 2001, January 21, 2008, and October
7, 2008. In addition intermeeting statements related to “liquidity facilities” were released on: August 10/16,
2008 and May 9, 2010. Over the same sample period, 24 other unscheduled meetings took place without any
immediate release of a statement. These meetings were made public only with the release of the minutes of
the subsequent scheduled meeting (about one to two months after the original meeting took place).
5The only exception to this rule is the statement of March 26, 1996 which was released in the morning
because the Chairman was scheduled to testify in Congress later that day. The timing of the release was
pre-announced to investors.
6The meeting dates that we exclude are Dec 17 1968, Sep 18 1979, Oct 6 1979, and Dec 18 1990.
5
=== PAGE 7 ===
Changes in the frequency of monetary policy decisions and in the communication of those
decisions are only some of the many policy changes since the 1960s ranging from policy
instruments to operating procedures. Clarida, Gali, and Gertler [2000] study parameter
shifts in monetary policy reaction functions between 1960 and 1996, and consider two main
subperiods. The ﬁrst, from 1960:Q1 through 1979:Q2, encompasses the tenures of Chairmen
Martin, Burns, and Miller and the following one that spans the terms of Chairmen Volcker
and Greenspan. They ﬁnd evidence that interest rate policy in the post-Volcker period has
been much more sensitive to changes in expected inﬂation than in the pre-Volcker period.
While other researchers have questioned the importance of policy changes relative to exoge-
nous changes in the volatility of shocks (see e.g. Sims and Zha [2006]), the appointment of
Volcker as Chairman in 1979 is generally considered to be a key shift in the Fed’s policy
vis-a-vis inﬂation (see e.g. Bernanke, Blinder, and McCallum [2005]).
To enhance transparency in communicating their policy decisions over the past 30 years,
members of the FOMC have increasingly employed speeches, testimonies to Congress and
other means to communicate to market participants the likely path of monetary policy.
While this communication is today considered a key policy instrument in its own regard (e.g.
Blinder, Ehrmann, Fratzscher, Haan, and Jansen [2008]), importantly FOMC participants
refrain from any policy discussion in the week leading up to each FOMC meeting (the purdah
period, see Ehrmann and Fratzscher [2009]). Hence, no such information about the likely
outcome of the policy decision is released in the days before FOMC meetings. This is an
important fact to bear in mind when interpreting the evidence presented in this paper.
2.2 Data
Our analysis focuses on ﬁnancial asset returns around scheduled FOMC meetings between
January 1960 and March 2011 with a special emphasis on the post-1980 and 1994 samples.
Most of the evidence on the latter subsample is based on intraday data and focuses on the
24-hour period from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement until 2pm
on the day of a scheduled FOMC announcement, which is about ﬁfteen minutes before the
announcement release time. Hence, by construction, returns computed over this time interval
do not contain meeting outcomes and therefore allow us to exclusively study anticipatory
eﬀects associated with FOMC announcements. 7
The evidence prior to 1994 is based on daily data. Over that period we consider as pre-
FOMC returns those earned on days of scheduled FOMC meetings, which mark the last
7Due to limited availability of intraday data the cross-sectional analysis of pre-FOMC returns is based
on daily data.
6
=== PAGE 8 ===
trading session before investors could observe signals about the likely policy action.
We use several data sources: Thomson Reuters TickHistory and Tickdata.com for intraday
data, Bloomberg for dividend data as well as international stock returns and foreign central
bank announcements, and Ken French’s website for daily returns on size and industry sorted
U.S. stock portfolios. We use information on the number of articles published in the ﬁnancial
press from Factiva and also obtain historical Wall Street Journal coverage from ProQuest.
Table 1 provides summary statistics on FOMC days and non-FOMC days for the main
variables used in our empirical analysis. Since most of our analysis refers to mean returns in
these two subsamples, we omit a detailed discussion here and instead refer interested readers
to the table.
3 Empirical Results
In this section we present the empirical ﬁndings of the paper. We ﬁrst document excess
returns on the S&P500 index in anticipation of U.S. monetary policy decisions. We then look
at the persistence of these returns and show the robustness of their statistical signiﬁcance.
We then report some cross-sectional and international evidence. Finally we study returns
on other asset classes and of the S&P500 index before other major macroeconomic data
releases.
3.1 The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift since 1994
Figure 1 shows a striking pattern of U.S. stock returns around FOMC announcements. The
black solid line in the chart represents the mean point-wise cumulative intraday percent
return of the S&P500 index (SPX henceforth) over a three-day window from the market
open on the day ahead of scheduled FOMC meetings to the day after. The mean is taken
over the 131 scheduled FOMC meetings from September 1994 to March 2011. 8
As seen in the ﬁgure, the SPX index displays a strong upward drift in the hours ahead of
FOMC announcements. First, the SPX index rises slightly on the afternoon of the day before
the FOMC (left panel). It then drifts sharply higher in the morning of scheduled FOMC
announcements. Right before the time of the announcement (vertical red dashed line) it
reaches a level about 50 basis points above that of the previous day’s open. Following
8Relative to the dates reported in Table A.1 we lose one observation (Jul 1, 1998) because of missing
intraday data. The close-to-close return on that day was 1.3 percent.
7
=== PAGE 9 ===
the announcement at 2:15pm the SPX is on average essentially ﬂat, both in the hours
immediately after the announcement and on the following day (right panel). As evidenced by
the point-wise 95% conﬁdence interval for the mean return (light grey area), the cumulative
return earned prior to scheduled FOMC announcements is strongly signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from zero.
To put the economic magnitude of this pre-FOMC drift in perspective, the dashed black
line in Figure 1 shows the average cumulative returns on all other three-day windows in
the sample excluding day triplets centered around FOMC announcements, along with the
point-wise 95% conﬁdence bands (dark gray shaded area). 9 On average cumulative returns
on these days have essentially been zero over our sample period.
The mean intraday returns in the chart do not include dividend payments, and do not account
for the level of the risk-free rate. To assess the magnitudes of excess stock market returns
prior to scheduled FOMC announcements more formally we run the simple dummy-variable
regression model:
rxt =β0 +β11t(pre-FOMC) +βxXt +ϵt, (1)
where rxt denotes the cum-dividend log excess return on the SPX over the risk-free rate in
percentage points.10 In the main speciﬁcation, the explanatory variable is a dummy variable,
which is equal to one on scheduled pre-FOMC announcement windows and zero otherwise.
In alternative speciﬁcations in Section 4 we also include additional control variablesXt.
In the regression excluding other controls Xt, the coeﬃcient β1 is the mean return on pre-
FOMC windows when the constantβ0 is omitted, and the mean excess return diﬀerential on
pre-FOMC windows versus other days when the constant is present. The constant measures
the unconditional mean excess return earned on all time periods outside of the pre-FOMC
window.
Table 2 reports coeﬃcient estimates for these two parameters over diﬀerent return windows.
The dependent variable in the ﬁrst two columns is the 2pm-to-2pm SPX excess return. By
construction, this 24-hour return ending on 2pm on the day of scheduled FOMC announce-
ments does the realized policy decision, which is yet to be announced. As seen in the ﬁrst
column, for the 131 FOMC observations in the sample, the 24-hour window return right
before the FOMC meeting has on average been 49 basis points, with a t-statistic of more
than 4.5 based on the Huber-White standard errors (squared brackets). As shown in the
9These intervals account for the serial correlation due to the overlapping window structure of these returns
using Newey-West standard errors. Truncation lags are wider than the actual daily overlap because of the
kernel down-weighting: three-day window on the second day, and a ﬁve-day window on the third day.
10We use as risk-free rate the daily rate on a one-month T-Bill locked in the month before.
8
=== PAGE 10 ===
second column, this excess return has been orders of magnitude larger than the mean excess
return on all other 2pm-to-2pm windows in the sample (less than .5 basis points). Yet, there
are only eight scheduled FOMC meetings each year. To gauge the impact of this return
diﬀerence on the total annual realized stock returns in the sample, the middle panel of Table
2 presents annualized returns on FOMC and non-FOMC days. While the excess return on
the SPX over the 24 hours prior to the FOMC announcement has on average been 3.89
percent per year, it has only been 0.88 percent on all remaining trading days. These point
estimates imply that since 1994 about 80 percent of realized excess stock returns in the U.S.
have been earned in the 24 hours before scheduled monetary policy announcements. The
simple strategy that consists in buying the SPX at 2pm the day before a scheduled FOMC
announcement and selling ﬁfteen minutes before the announcement while holding cash on
all other days would have earned a large annualized Sharpe ratio of 1.14 as reported in the
Table.
Consistent with Figure 1, the excess SPX return between 2pm and market close on the day
of the announcement has instead been zero (column 3). In other words, while the SPX
has displayed a large positive drift in the 24 hours leading up to the announcement, stock
returns have on average been zero at or following the announcement. This implies that while
equity market investors have at times been surprised by the FOMC decision (Bernanke and
Kuttner [2005]), these surprises averaged out to zero in our sample period.
Looking at the close-to-close excess returns on the SPX (column 4), which include the af-
ternoon following the announcement, rather than the afternoon before, the FOMC return
diﬀerential has been somewhat lower at about 33 basis points in the sample period. How-
ever, the average close-to-close return on all other days is less than a basis point, and the
annualized FOMC day return on a close-to-close basis still accounts for more than half of
realized excess stock returns (2.7 percent compared to 2.08 percent on all other days) in the
sample. Moreover, the close-to-close FOMC day return still remains highly signiﬁcant and
yields a considerable annualized Sharpe Ratio of 0.84 as reported in the Table.
One may worry that the properties of the pre-FOMC returns crucially depend on the exact
24-hour time window that we consider. This is not the case. Indeed in the last two columns
we consider a close-to-2pm and a close of two day prior to 2pm window. In both cases the
pre-FOMC return remains highly signiﬁcant, with a Sharpe Ratio of 1.43 for the close-to-
2pm window and a pre-FOMC drift of 54 basis point in the close of the two day prior to
2pm window.
Moreover, one might be concerned about potential outliers. Table 5 provides summary
statistics of the 2pm-to-2pm return on the SPX on FOMC days versus all other days in
9
=== PAGE 11 ===
the post-1994 sample. The mean excess return and its standard error (ﬁrst two rows) are
the same as in Table 2. The standard deviation of excess returns is 1.2 per cent both on
FOMC days and on other days, implying that, in terms of variance, stocks are not more
risky on FOMC days (we discuss the relation between volatility and returns in Section
4.1). The skewness of the two return distributions, however, displays a notable diﬀerence.
While equity returns exhibit a strong positive skew ahead of FOMC announcements, they are
slightly negatively skewed on all other days. Indeed, 98 of the 131 pre-FOMC announcement
returns are positive in our sample—or three quarters of the total—but only 33 are negative
(not reported in the table). On the other hand, positive and negative excess returns are
roughly equally split on non-FOMC days in the sample.
The distributional diﬀerences in the empirical densities are shown in Figure A.2. The 2pm-
2pm FOMC return density (black line) is similar to that on non-FOMC days (grey), but
importantly omits a left tail, with most of the corresponding density mass instead concen-
trated in positive returns. While at this point it is clear that outliers do not dominate the
results we have seen so far, Table 5 shows that the kurtosis of pre-FOMC returns is slightly
higher than on regular days suggesting a somewhat more fat-tailed distribution on FOMC
days. As a ﬁnal check we thus drop the top and bottom percentile and compare the result-
ing moments of the FOMC and non-FOMC day distributions (last two columns in Table
5).11 None of the summary measures are qualitatively aﬀected when we exclude outliers.
Dropping the top and bottom 1% of all observations, the mean pre-FOMC announcement
return is still very large at 45 basis points while the mean return on all other days is 1 basis
point (as evidenced in the second row, the statistical signiﬁcance increases). The standard
deviation of returns remains very similar in both samples. While the skewness of pre-FOMC
announcement returns somewhat falls without the tail observations, it is still positive while
that on all other days remains negative. Finally, the kurtosis is now similar in both trimmed
samples.
3.2 Pre-FOMC Returns Before 1994
We have focused thus far on the 1994-2011 sample when FOMC decisions have been explicitly
announced to investors at known times. As discussed in Section 2, prior to 1994 market
11The top and bottom 1% of pre-FOMC returns amount to only two observations. The largest positive
outlier is a 9.5% return on October 29, 2008. News reports on that day partly attributed the surge in
equity prices to speculation that the FOMC may cut interest rates the next day. Moreover, talk of a federal
rescue for General Motors and Chrysler also may have contributed to the price action. The largest negative
outlier is a -2.9 % return on June 26, 2002, driven mainly by news of an accounting fraud at phone company
WorldCom.
10
=== PAGE 12 ===
participants inferred policy decision on the days after the FOMC meeting through open
market operations of the New York Fed’s trading desk. Following the convention in Kuttner
[2001] and Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] we set the pre-announcement window to be the day
of scheduled FOMC meetings. 12
Table 3 presents the estimation results for the dummy variable regression (1) of pre-FOMC
returns for diﬀerent samples including data before 1994. In these regressions, we splice
together the daily excess return on the SPX before 1994 and the 2pm-to-2pm excess return
after 1994. The ﬁrst column provides the regression results for the sample from 1960-2011,
covering more than 50 years of daily data and a total of 524 scheduled FOMC meetings.
Over that sample, the average excess return earned on non-FOMC days is estimated to be
statistically insigniﬁcant 0.9 basis points. In contrast, the return diﬀerential earned in the
pre-FOMC window is estimated to be 16.7 basis points which is statistically signiﬁcant at
the 1 percent level.
While highly statistically signiﬁcant, this average pre-FOMC return is considerably smaller
than the 49 basis points that we found in the post-1994 sample. It is therefore interesting
to ask how much of the average pre-FOMC return from 1960-2011 is accounted for by the
latter part of the sample. To do so, we split the period prior to 1994 into two subperiods.
Columns 2 and 3 in Table 3 show the regression outputs for the period from 1960-1979 and
1980-1993, respectively. These results show that prior to 1980, pre-FOMC returns have been
essentially zero while between 1980 and 1993 they have averaged a statistically signiﬁcant
20 basis points in excess of the 2 basis points earned on all non-FOMC days. Column 4 in
Table 3 provides the regression results for the sample from 1980-2011. According to these,
the excess pre-FOMC return on the SPX has averaged a highly signiﬁcant 36 basis points
over the last 30 years. Moreover, pre-FOMC returns have accounted for more than half of the
realized excess stock returns over that period and the simple strategy of holding stocks only
right ahead of FOMC announcements and cash otherwise would have delivered an annualized
Sharpe ratio of 0.92.
In sum, the results in this section show that pre-FOMC returns have started to be prevalent
in the 1980s, have increased in magnitude and signiﬁcance over time and account for a large
fraction of U.S. realized excess stock returns over the past few decades.
12As discussed before, we exclude from the sample four days on which the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors released discount rate decisions on days of scheduled FOMC meetings. The average excess return
on the SPX on those ﬁve days is -0.5 basis points.
11
=== PAGE 13 ===
3.3 Persistence
We have argued thus far that the pre-FOMC returns account for large fractions of total
realized excess stock returns over the last few decades. Such a decomposition relies on the
presumption that pre-FOMC returns are not reversed on subsequent days and are not asso-
ciated with oﬀsetting negative returns in the days prior. We assess this issue by estimating
regression (1) for the ﬁve days before and after FOMC announcements. Table 4 summarizes
results from these regressions for the two sample periods from 1994-2011 and 1980-2011,
respectively. In both samples, we ﬁnd that only the pre-FOMC dummy is signiﬁcant. While
the SPX features a few small negative returns in the ﬁve-day windows before and after the
pre-FOMC window, none of which is statistically signiﬁcant. Moreover, the cumulative re-
turns on the ﬁve days before and on the ﬁve days after pre-FOMC news windows is essentially
zero in the 1994-2011 sample. Interestingly, in the 1980-2011 sample we see an economically
meaningful (15 basis points ) but statistically insigniﬁcant additional positive cumulative
return over the ﬁve days following the pre-FOMC trading session. Most importantly, in
either sample we do not ﬁnd evidence of pre-FOMC return reversals.
3.4 Inference
In the regression tables above, we have relied on asymptotic normality in gauging the sta-
tistical signiﬁcance of the estimated coeﬃcients. However, one may be concerned that the
relatively small number of observations and the relatively fat tails of the empirical distri-
bution of pre-FOMC returns may invalidate standard asymptotics. In order to address this
concern, we carry out three diﬀerent bootstrap exercises and conﬁrm that the statistical sig-
niﬁcance is not due to small sample issues. Moreover, we carry out a reality-check exercise
which shows that the large signiﬁcance of the pre-FOMC returns that we document is highly
unlikely to explained by data-snooping across diﬀerent macroeconomic news releases.
Bootstrapped standard errors for dummy variable regression In the ﬁrst exercise,
we assess the statistical signiﬁcance of the estimated constant and dummy variable coeﬃcient
in regression (1) using a simple bootstrapping approach. Precisely, we draw with replacement
a return series of length 131 from the observed distribution of pre-FOMC returns in our 1994-
2011 sample. We also draw with replacement from the observed distribution of non-FOMC
returns a series of the same length as the total number of non-FOMC days (4010) in our
sample. With the two artiﬁcial series at hand, we then reestimate the dummy variable
regression (1) and record the estimated coeﬃcients. We repeat this process 100,000 times.
12
=== PAGE 14 ===
The empirical distribution of the estimated coeﬃcient on the FOMC dummy variable is
shown in the upper left panel of Figure A.3 in the Appendix. It is centered around a mean
of 48.5 basis points with a standard deviation of 10.8 basis points. The empirical distribution
of the regression constant which measures the excess return on the SPX on all other days
which we do not report to conserve space is centered around a mean of 0.4 basis points with
a standard deviation of 1.9 basis points. These numbers are very close to the OLS regression
results in Table 2 and show that the asymptotic standard errors do not understate the
sampling variability of the estimated means.
Our conclusion is not altered when we repeat this exercise for the 1980-2011 sample. Indeed,
as shown in Figure A.4, for that sample period the bootstrap distribution of dummy variable
coeﬃcients has a mean of 35.5 basis points with a standard deviation of 7.3 basis points,
which is again very similar to our OLS regression results in Table 3. Hence, the strong
signiﬁcance of average pre-FOMC returns clearly survives when we use bootstrapped rather
than asymptotically normal standard errors.
Random Sampling from Non-FOMC Return Distribution One might worry that
the large observed average pre-FOMC return is simply due to luck. To address that concern
we use another simple bootstrapping exercise to answer the question “how likely is it that one
would observe a sample average of 49 basis points in a short random sample of non-FOMC
day returns”? In particular, we sample with replacement from the observed distribution of
non-FOMC returns in our 1994-2011 sample a time series of length 131, the total number
of scheduled FOMC dates in the 1994-2011 period. We then record the sample average
of that bootstrapped return series. We repeat this process 100,000 times. The bootstrap
distribution of sample averages for the 1994-2011 sample (upper-right panel of Figure A.3)
is centered around a mean of 0.7 basis points with a standard deviation of 10.5 basis. More
interestingly, thep-value of observing a mean greater than the sample average of pre-FOMC
returns of 48.8 basis points is one. Repeating this exercise for the 1980-2011 period (upper-
right panel of Figure A.4), we ﬁnd the same result. In summary, for both samples it is
extremely unlikely to have observed a time series of pre-FOMC returns with such a high
sample mean by pure luck.
Random Sampling from Pseudo Pre-FOMC Return Distribution with Zero Mean
In light of the relatively small number of FOMC meetings and the high kurtosis of pre-
FOMC day returns, one might be concerned that it is not unlikely to observe a sample mean
as large as the pre-FOMC return that we document in a short sample that is drawn from
13
=== PAGE 15 ===
a distribution which has a population mean of zero. 13 We assess that probability in the
following simple way. First, we construct a pseudo zero-mean pre-FOMC return distribution
by subtracting the sample mean of 48.8 basis from all 131 observations in the 1994-2011
sample. Hence, this pseudo distribution by construction has a sample mean of zero but
an identical sample standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis as the observed distribution
of pre-FOMC returns. We then randomly draw with replacement from the pseudo pre-
FOMC distribution 100,000 samples of length 131 and record the empirical distribution of
sample means from those draws. The resulting histogram of sample means is given in the
lower-left panel of Figure A.3. As expected, the distribution is tightly centered around zero.
More importantly, we can reject with a probability of 99.99 percent that we could have
observed pre-FOMC returns with an average of 48.8 basis points if the true distribution had
a population mean of zero. Repeating this exercise for the 1980-2011 sample period (lower-
left panel of Figure A.4), we ﬁnd that not a single draw out of 100,000 has a sample mean
greater than the 36.6 basis points that we observe for the pre-FOMC return over this period.
Hence, we can safely rule out that the distribution of pre-FOMC returns has a population
mean of zero.
Data-Snooping As previously discussed, we ﬁnd the pre-FOMC returns to be highly
statistically signiﬁcant while the SPX does not display excess returns ahead of other major
U.S. macroeconomic announcements in our sample. A skeptical reader may worry that the
signiﬁcance of our ﬁnding (and thus the Sharpe-ratios) could be the artiﬁcial outcome of
an extensive search across the universe of economic news announcements for the highest
t-statistic. Of course, such a search would not bias the size of the return.
We address this concern by carrying out a reality check in the spirit of White [2000]. In par-
ticular, we simulate the snooping bias by resampling 100,000 times the 2pm-to-2pm excess
return on the SPX and collecting the largest absolute t-statistic among the ten economic
announcements considered in Table 8 (including the FOMC) for each replication. The boot-
strap distribution of maximum absolute t-statistics is provided in the lower-right panel of
Figure A.3. It shows that 99.98 percent of the empirical density of maximum absolute t-
statistics are smaller than the value of 4.51 that we ﬁnd for the pre-FOMC announcement
return in the SPX for the 1994-2011 sample (Table 2, column 1). Repeating this exercise for
the 1980-2011 sample (lower-right panel of Figure A.4), we ﬁnd an even smaller probability
of having snooped a t-statistic larger than 4.86, which is the asymptotic t-statistic of the
pre-FOMC dummy that we estimate for the 1980-2011 sample (Table 3, last column). In
other words, the statistical signiﬁcance of our ﬁnding is extremely unlikely to be the result
13We thank an anonymous referee for raising that point.
14
=== PAGE 16 ===
of a data-snooping exercise.
3.5 Cross-sectional Evidence
Having established that aggregate U.S. stock market exhibits economically large and statisti-
cally highly signiﬁcant pre-FOMC returns, this section shows that U.S. equity excess returns
around FOMC announcements have been broad based across industry- and size-sorted port-
folios. We also characterize the cross-section of these returns and show that a single market
factor model captures a signiﬁcant fraction of the portfolio variation on FOMC announce-
ment days. Because of limited availability of intraday data at the disaggregated level, this
evidence is based on daily close-to-close returns. We start by discussing the evidence for the
1994-2011 sample.
Table A.5 summarizes results of the dummy variable regression (1) including a constant, a
FOMC dummy for excess returns on the CRSP value/equal weighted, and ten value weighted
portfolios sorted by ﬁrm size. Not surprisingly, the return pattern for the value-weighted
portfolio (column 1) is very similar to that for the close-to-close return on the S&P500
index (Table 2). Indeed, the return diﬀerential has been a highly signiﬁcant 36 basis points,
FOMC announcement days have accounted for the majority of the annual excess returns in
the sample, and the Sharpe ratio of an FOMC-only investment strategy has been equal to
0.92.
The daily excess return diﬀerential on the CRSP equal weighted market portfolio (column
2) on FOMC days has been somewhat smaller at 25 basis points, but still highly statisti-
cally signiﬁcant. Since the equal weighted portfolio attributes a large weight to small ﬁrms
relative to their share of total market capitalization, this ﬁnding suggests the FOMC return
diﬀerential may be somewhat lower for small ﬁrms. This conjecture is conﬁrmed by the re-
sults for the size decile portfolios shown in the remaining columns of Table A.5. Indeed, the
portfolio containing the smallest ﬁrms earned an average excess return of 20 basis points on
FOMC announcement days.14 All remaining decile portfolios, instead, displayed diﬀerential
returns ranging between 31 to 46 basis points, with Sharpe ratios between 0.8 to 1.07.
Table A.3 provides estimates for the dummy variable regressions for the 49 industry sorted
portfolios from Ken French’s website. While there is some cross-sectional dispersion of
FOMC announcement day returns across industries, the excess return diﬀerential is broad-
based. Indeed, 36 out of 49 industry portfolios feature excess returns on FOMC announce-
ment days that are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at least at the 5 percent level. Among
14This smallest market cap portfolio contains on average about 50 percent of all ﬁrms in the CRSP universe.
15
=== PAGE 17 ===
these, the dummy variable coeﬃcients range from 23 basis points for the consumer goods
industry (HSHLD) to 69 basis points for trading ﬁrms (FIN). A group of only ten industries
as diverse as Agriculture (AGRIC), Food products (FOOD), Utilities (UTIL), and Telecom-
munication (TELCM) do not feature statistically signiﬁcant excess returns on scheduled
FOMC announcement days.
It is natural to ask whether the average FOMC announcement day returns in diﬀerent
industries are in line with their typical comovement with the market portfolio, as would be
implied by the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). To answer this question, we estimate
industry betas from a regression of the excess return in each industry on the excess return
of the CRSP value-weighted market portfolios. 15 We then estimate a regression of average
excess returns on the 59 industry and size portfolios on the estimated betas. Figure 4 shows
a scatter plot of observed average FOMC announcement day returns against the ﬁtted values
from this regression. We superimpose the estimated regression line (dashed) as well as the
45 degree line (solid). The chart shows that the single market factor model provides a fairly
good description of the cross-section of FOMC announcement day returns. Indeed, the slope
coeﬃcient λ, which represents the price of market risk, is estimated to be 49 basis points
and highly statistically signiﬁcant. By contrast, the constant α in the regression is not
statistically diﬀerent from zero. Moreover, the adjusted R-squared of the CAPM regression
on FOMC announcement days is 64 percent. In sharp contrast to the poor ﬁt of the CAPM
on all daily returns (Fama and French [1993]), these results suggest that the observed cross-
sectional variation of FOMC announcement day returns is well captured by exposure to
aggregate market risk. 16
The cross-sectional distribution of pre-FOMC returns is qualitatively very similar in the
longer sample from 1980-2011, as shown in Tables A.6 and A.4 in the appendix. Indeed,
while the point estimates are somewhat lower over the longer sample, a larger total number
of portfolios is shown to have pre-FOMC returns that are statistically signiﬁcant at least at
the 5% level. Moreover, also in the longer sample the CAPM does a reasonable job explaining
the cross-sectional dispersion of pre-FOMC returns.
15We run this regression using daily data including FOMC announcement days. Dropping these days from
the sample barely aﬀects the β estimates.
16At announcement, Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] also ﬁnd that the CAPM does a good job at explain-
ing the cross-sectional variation of the response of diﬀerent industry portfolio returns to monetary policy
shocks. Moreover, in a recent paper Savor and Wilson [2012] ﬁnd that on days when news about inﬂation,
unemployment, or FOMC decisions is scheduled to be announced, stock market beta is signiﬁcantly related
to returns on individual stocks, equity portfolios, as well as other asset classes.
16
=== PAGE 18 ===
3.6 International Evidence
Previous research has documented ample evidence of international stock return comovement
(e.g. Karolyi and Stulz [1996], Forbes and Rigobon [2002], and Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang
[2009]). This evidence suggests that international equity indices may also feature an FOMC
equity return diﬀerential.
To assess this question, we ﬁrst reestimate model (1) with a constant and a FOMC dummy on
daily close-to-close returns of major OECD stock indices for the sample period from Septem-
ber 1994 to March 2011. The results of these regressions are documented in Table 6. 17 The
ﬁrst ﬁve columns report estimates based on returns on the German DAX, the British FTSE
100, the French CAC40, the Spanish IBEX, as well as the Swiss SMI. Importantly, because
of the time oﬀset the close-to-close returns on these European stock indices never include
scheduled FOMC announcements and thus provide estimates of pre-FOMC announcement
returns. The FOMC dummy variables in all ﬁve countries are highly statistically signiﬁcant
and economically large, with estimates ranging from 29 basis points in Switzerland to 52
basis points in France. In all ﬁve countries the Sharpe ratios of an FOMC only investment
strategy range between 0.75 and 1.04. Results for the Canadian TSX index and the Japanese
NIKKEI 225 are reported in the last two columns of Table 6. The TSX shows a statistically
signiﬁcant albeit lower FOMC announcement day return than the European indices. 18 In-
terestingly, the NIKKEI index is the only major stock market index that does not feature a
signiﬁcant FOMC announcement day return.
In the bottom panel of the Table we repeat the same regressions in the post-1980 sample, and
also ﬁnd evidence of large pre-FOMC returns on major international stock indexes.
Figure 5 visualizes these results. It displays cumulative returns over the trading hours of
the respective exchange on the international stock indices on three days around scheduled
FOMC announcements, and the SPX cumulative return is superimposed for reference (it
is the same as in Figure 1). The international pattern of intraday stock returns is very
similar to that of the U.S. In other words, the large pre-FOMC return appears to be a
global phenomenon. In unreported results, we also investigated whether European, UK
and Japan stock indices feature similar return patterns around its corresponding central
bank’s monetary policy announcement days, but we failed to ﬁnd such eﬀects. While a
global phenomenon, the pre-announcement return is thus speciﬁc to U.S. monetary policy
17For lack of comparable dividend and risk-free rate data, these regressions are based on ex-dividend raw
returns rathern than cum-dividend excess returns as in the case of the U.S.
18Note that the TSX is computed from close prices taken after the FOMC announcement and therefore
contains both a pre-announcement and a post-announcement component.
17
=== PAGE 19 ===
decisions. In the next section, we show that this eﬀect is also absent for other major U.S.
macroeconomic announcements.
3.7 Other Macroeconomic Announcements and Other Assets
In this Section, we ﬁrst document that the SPX does not feature abnormal excess returns
ahead of other major macroeconomic announcements. We then show that ﬁxed income assets
do not exhibit abnormal pre-FOMC announcement returns.
We consider a set of nine major economic releases: total nonfarm payroll employment (NF-
PAY) published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), weekly initial claims for
unemployment insurance (INCLM) released by the U.S. Department of Labor, the advance
GDP (GDPADV) estimate released quarterly by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),
the monthly Institute for Supply Management’s (ISM) manufacturing index, Industrial Pro-
duction (IP) released monthly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Housing
Starts (HS) published monthly by the Census Bureau, Producer Price Index (PPI) and Con-
sumer Price Index (CPI) data published monthly by the BLS, as well as Personal Income
(PI) released monthly by the BEA. Except for IP, which is released at 9:15 am ET, and
the ISM, which is released at 10:00 am ET, all these data releases occur at 8:30 am ET. To
assess whether there are pre-announcement returns for these macroeconomic data releases,
we run a dummy variable regression where the dummy variable equals one on the day prior
to the release.
As shown in the upper panel of Table 8, none of the other macroeconomic releases feature
statistically signiﬁcant pre-announcement returns in the 1994-2011 sample. The largest
coeﬃcient is the one for housing starts which implies a 15 basis points excess return on
the SPX on days prior to that announcement. However, the standard deviation of that
return is also quite large at 9 basis points. We repeat these regressions for the 1980-2011
sample and report the results in the lower panel of Table 8. The results are qualitatively
similar. In this longer sample, the PPI release is the only macroeconomic news that exhibits
a pre-announcement return that is slightly signiﬁcant (and negative). As documented in the
reality check exercise in Section 3, one is bound to ﬁnd coeﬃcients that are signiﬁcant at
some given level if one is running enough dummy variable regressions. We thus conclude
that no other major macroeconomic announcement is associated with large and statistically
signiﬁcant pre-announcement returns.
We next study the pre-FOMC announcement eﬀects on Treasury securities of diﬀerent ma-
18
=== PAGE 20 ===
turities and interest rate futures. 19 The short-term rate derivatives that we consider are
standard market implied measures of policy rate expectations: the front month fed funds
futures contract and the fourth Eurodollar contract, which measure policy expectations one
month and one year out, respectively. FOMC dummy regression results for these securities
for the sample periods 1994-2011 and 1980-2011 are provided in Table 7. For the 1994-2011
sample none of the coeﬃcients is statistically signiﬁcant at conventional conﬁdence levels.
For the 1980-2011 sample the on-the-run ten-year Treasury is signiﬁcant at the ten percent
level with a coeﬃcient of less than a basis point. 20 In sum, the results in this section show
that the pre-announcement drift that we report is speciﬁc to equities ahead of FOMC an-
nouncements. It does not exist ahead of other macroeconomic announcements and in ﬁxed
income securities ahead of FOMC announcements. We now turn to potential explanations
of the empirical ﬁndings documented thus far.
4 Potential Explanations
In this section, we attempt to rationalize the pre-FOMC drift with a number of alternative
explanations. We start by discussing a few standard risk-based explanations. We then try
to reconcile our ﬁndings with models of political risk, investor inattention, and time varying
stock market participation.
4.1 Standard Risk-Based Explanations
Recent speciﬁcations of the canonical consumption-based asset pricing model, for example
featuring habit preferences (Campbell and Cochrane [1999]) or long-run risks (Bansal and
Yaron [2004]) have been shown to be consistent with the magnitude of U.S. equity risk
premium in the post-war period. In consumption based models, investors demand compen-
sation for holding assets whose payoﬀs are positively correlated with their marginal utility of
consumption. While, of course, it is hard to measure consumption at intraday frequencies,
it seems unlikely that its covariance with stock returns would be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the
24-hour window ahead of FOMC announcements. Similarly, it is not clear why new informa-
19See Kuttner [2001] and Bernanke and Kuttner [2005], for asset responses to policy rate decisions, and
G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson [2005] and Lucca and Trebbi [2009] for responses to the content of the
statements.
20A closer inspection of this result reveals that it is entirely driven by a few outlier observations in 1980, a
year when the bond market was in turmoil and in which money supply numbers were coincidentally released
on days of FOMC meetings. When we start the sample in 1981, the FOMC dummy becomes insigniﬁcant
for the ten-year Treasury.
19
=== PAGE 21 ===
tion about future consumption would be released right before FOMC announcements. While
this leaves the door open for potential shifts in risk aversion over the 24-hour windows, as a
source of the change in the covariance, such shifts would still require an explanation.
Financial asset prices may jump in response to large unexpected realizations of economic
news announcements. As the direction of the surprise is not predetermined, holding ﬁnancial
assets around economic announcements is a risk that investors need to be compensated for.
Previous research has found that this risk is priced in equities (e.g., Pan [2002]). Figure 6
plots the ﬁve-minute moving sums of squared tick-by-tick returns on the SPX in the three-day
window around the FOMC announcement. As one may suspect, realized volatility jumps at
2:15pm on scheduled FOMC days. Yet, as we documented before, the FOMC announcement
return is earned before the actual release. Because of the timing diﬀerence, it is therefore
diﬃcult to reconcile the pre-FOMC drift with pure jump risk at the announcement. That
being said, we will discuss alternative models below in which informational frictions or limited
market participation can give rise to smooth asset price adjustments in anticipation of events
that represent jump risks.
We turn next to volatility and liquidity risk. First we note from Figure 6 that realized
volatility is somewhat lower ahead of the FOMC announcement, and, as discussed below,
the same holds for implied volatility (as measured by the VIX). Starting with Black [1976],
a number of papers have shown a negative contemporaneous correlation between volatility
and returns. Campbell and Hentschel [1992], in particular, discuss a “volatility feedback
eﬀect” where causality runs from volatility to returns. In that explanation, because of
its persistence, an unexpected decline in volatility leads to a downward revision of future
expected volatility, and thus to lower risk.
A large literature has also documented a negative correlation between equity returns and
trading liquidity (Amihud and Mendelson [1986], Campbell, Grossman, and Wang [1993],
Pastor and Stambaugh [2003] and Acharya and Pedersen [2005] among others). While most
of the literature focuses on the cross-section of returns, a few papers have also studied the
impact of liquidity on market-wide returns. 21
While we do not observe trades or bid-ask spreads for all SPX constituents on an intraday
basis, we proxy liquidity measures for the cash-index basket with measures on tick-by-tick
trades and quotes on the SP500 E-mini futures, which started trading in 1997, and the
21Amihud [2002], for instance, constructs an simple measure of illiquidity and documents a positive rela-
tionship between illiquidity and future excess returns, and a negative relationship between contemporaneous
unexpected illiquidity and excess returns in U.S. equities. He rationalizes the latter result with the notion
that higher realized illiquidity increases expected illiquidity which in turn raises expected stock returns and
lowers contemporaneous stock prices.
20
=== PAGE 22 ===
SPDR S&P500 exchange-traded fund (SPY, available to us since 1996). Both track the SPX
very closely and exhibit almost identical pre-FOMC announcement returns as the cash index
itself.
Figure 7 shows ﬁve minute average trading volumes on the most traded (either ﬁrst- or next-
to-front) E-mini SP500 futures contract over the same three-day window as above. Because
trading volume has a low-frequency trend in our sample period, we display volume levels
relative to their prior 21-day mean. For comparison, we also superimpose intraday average
relative volumes on non-FOMC days. Trading volumes on the day prior to an FOMC
announcement follow the typical U-shaped pattern on other days. Not surprisingly, on days
of scheduled FOMC meetings volumes spike at the time of the FOMC announcement. Earlier
in the day, trading volumes slowly decline from the high opening levels, as on other days,
but bottom out at about a 15% lower level than on regular days.
In sum, realized volatility and liquidity are both lower in the pre-FOMC drift time window.
This is consistent with the fact that no new FOMC information is consistently being released
during the purdah period. We assess whether the reduction in these two factors can explain
the pre-FOMC return by including volatility and liquidity proxies as controlsXt in our main
regression (1). Since their expected and unexpected components may play diﬀerent roles in
explaining stock returns, we ﬁrst decompose all measures of volatility and liquidity into an
innovation and a component known at time t − 1 using a simple AR(1) model.
Table 11 provides estimation results for the dummy variable regression (1) where the depen-
dent variable is the 2pm-2pm excess return on the SPX. We use liquidity measures deﬁned
on the SPY which are available on a longer sample than the E-mini futures. The sample
in this regression only starts in January 1996. We ﬁrst re-estimate the pre-FOMC dummy
regression without controls. Over the shorter sample the pre-FOMC drift is 53 basis points
for the SPY with a t-statistic well above 4 (column 1). When we include the 24-hour lagged
trading volume and its contemporaneous innovation, the coeﬃcients on lagged liquidity and
its innovation have the expected signs and are both strongly statistically signiﬁcant. In par-
ticular, innovations to liquidity are negatively correlated with stock returns suggesting that
investors demand compensation for being exposed to liquidity risk. The pre-FOMC dummy
coeﬃcient drops to 43 basis points, but remains highly statistically signiﬁcant. This could
potentially suggest that the pre-FOMC return is partially compensation for lower aggregate
market liquidity ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements. 22
22We run the same regression using the bid-ask spread and the Amihud price impact measure for the SPY
as measures of liquidity. While they provide qualitatively similar results, these indicators are less signiﬁcant
and the coeﬃcient on the FOMC dummy drops by a smaller amount compared to the regression based on
trading volume.
21
=== PAGE 23 ===
We next study the impact of stock market volatility on pre-FOMC returns. We control for
the lagged (2pm on the previous day) level and the daily innovation of the VIX index, which
measures the option-implied volatility of the SPX. Column 2 in Table 11 provides these
results. While the lagged level of the VIX has virtually no impact on contemporaneous
returns, the innovation is very strongly negatively correlated with returns. As previously
discussed, this result is consistent with Campbell and Hentschel [1992]. More importantly,
adding the VIX innovation as a control variable reduces the point estimate on the pre-
FOMC dummy by 20 basis points, or about a third of the average pre-FOMC return in this
sample. However, the estimated dummy coeﬃcient of 33 basis points is still economically and
statistically very signiﬁcant. The results of this regression therefore suggest that a sizeable
fraction of the pre-FOMC drift might be explained by the fact that implied equity market
volatility drops ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements.
In order to understand whether liquidity and volatility provide independent information
about pre-FOMC returns, we control for both in a joint regression, reported in column 4 of
the Table. These results show that while the innovation to the VIX retains its signiﬁcance,
both the lagged level and the innovation of SPY trading volume essentially become unin-
formative. Moreover, the pre-FOMC dummy coeﬃcient remains strongly signiﬁcant at 32
basis points.
So far, the analysis in this section shows that a reduction in implied volatility, and to some
extent also a reduction in trading volume, on days of scheduled FOMC announcements
appear to account for some fraction of the average pre-FOMC returns. Moreover, it should
be kept in mind that the volatility feedback eﬀect predicts a negative causal eﬀect from
innovations to volatility and returns. Hence, we can only attribute a share of the pre-
FOMC return to volatility if the estimated innovations from the AR(1) regression of the
VIX on its lagged level represent actual surprises to market participants. Indeed, these
surprises might be overstated on days of scheduled FOMC announcements if volatility were
predictably lower on those days. In the last column of the table, we reestimate the joint
regression using as regressors the innovations from an AR(1) of the VIX and volume on
their own lags and the pre-FOMC dummy. While the coeﬃcient on the VIX innovation is
unaﬀected, the pre-FOMC dummy is now again equal to 52 basis points.
In sum, a fraction of the pre-FOMC returns may be accounted for by the lower market
volatility and trading volume ahead of FOMC announcements, to the extent that these
declines had been unexpected. Moreover one would still need to rationalize the declines in
volatility and liquidity. We discuss one such theory in the next section along with others
that can give rise to a drift in stock prices ahead of scheduled announcements.
22
=== PAGE 24 ===
4.2 Other Explanations
In the previous section, we found it hard to rationalize the pre-FOMC announcement return
with standard risk-based explanations. In this section, we consider several other candidate
explanations. We then discuss diﬀerent models which may give rise to price drifts ahead
of scheduled announcements. Where these theories imply predictions that are testable with
the available data, we perform the relevant tests.
Before turning to that discussion, we argue next that information leakages as a potential
source of the pre-FOMC drift is inconsistent with our empirical ﬁndings. As discussed
in Section 2, there is no oﬃcial communication by Federal Reserve oﬃcials in the pre-
FOMC window due to the purdah period, a self-imposed guideline to refrain from any
discussion of policy issues in the days ahead of FOMC meetings. Consistently, the volatility
of equity returns as well as the trading volume are extremely low before and jump at the
announcement. Further, as discussed in the next section, we ﬁnd that the pre-announcement
returns do not predict the post-announcement reaction. Finally, while the pre-FOMC returns
are a phenomenon common to equities worldwide, there is no such drift in U.S. ﬁxed income
assets which arguably are the most sensitive to monetary policy.
We next build some intuition about the source of the pre-FOMC return by correlating the
time-series of these returns with a few explanatory variables.
4.2.1 The Time Series of Pre-FOMC Announcement Returns
Figure 3 shows the time series of pre-FOMC announcement returns (green line) along with
the one-year moving average of these returns (black line) and on non-FOMC days (red line)
from 1980-2011.23 As seen from the black line, one-year average pre-FOMC returns remained
positive for the majority of the sample, and turned negative only for brief periods of time.
Moreover, eye-balling the pre-FOMC return series it appears that they are somewhat higher
around recessions and in periods of ﬁnancial turbulence such as the 1987 stock market
crash or the 1998 LTCM crisis. We study the potential determinants of the pre-FOMC
returns by regressing the time series of returns on explanatory variables capturing business
cycles, monetary policy cycles, market participants’ expectations of future Fed policy, market
uncertainty, and the surprise component of monetary policy decisions.
The results of these regressions are provided in Table 9 for the 1994-2011 sample and in
23The large right-tailed observation (October 29, 2008) that we exclude in Table 5 is excluded from the
pre-FOMC moving average and marked with an “X”. We also exclude this observation from the regressions
discussed next.
23
=== PAGE 25 ===
10 for the 1980-2011 sample. All explanatory variables except for dummy regressors are
standardized to have a zero mean and unit variance in order to facilitate interpretation of
the coeﬃcients. The ﬁrst column in the tables shows a regression of the pre-FOMC returns
on a NBER recession dummy. In the 1994-2011 sample the point estimate on the dummy is
positive and signiﬁcant at the 10% level. However, while still positive the coeﬃcient is not
statistically diﬀerent from zero in the longer 1980-2011 sample. Based on this evidence the
counter-cyclicality of pre-FOMC returns has been rather weak. Yet, a recession dummy is
only a coarse measure of economic activity and furthermore only known to market partici-
pants ex-post. To address these issues, in the next column we consider annual growth rates
of industrial production (IP) as well as annual CPI inﬂation as regressors. Both measures
are computed from real-time data. The two coeﬃcients are slightly negative but statistically
insigniﬁcant in the two samples, suggesting indeed that pre-FOMC returns are not strongly
countercyclical.24 The next column of Table 9 shows a regression on dummy variables for
periods of monetary policy easing and tightening. 25 The results show that the pre-FOMC
returns are considerably larger in periods of monetary policy easing (which to a good extent
overlap with recessions) in the shorter 1994-2011 sample, but the coeﬃcient is not signif-
icant. The coeﬃcients on both the easing and tightening dummies are economically and
statistically zero in the full sample from 1980-2011.
We next assess whether pre-FOMC equity returns are related to market participants’ ex-
pectations about the future path of monetary policy, as measured by the ﬁrst two principal
components (level and slope) from the cross-section of daily one through ﬁve year zero-
coupon Treasury yields from Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright [2007]. As we do not access
intraday yield curve data, we lag the principal components by two days with respect to the
FOMC announcement day to get an ex-ante snapshot of the information in the yield curve
available to market participants right before the trading window over which we observe the
pre-FOMC returns. As shown in the fourth column of Table 9, the slope enters with a neg-
ative coeﬃcient that is signiﬁcant at the 10% level. The point estimates imply that a one
standard deviation increase in the slope, lowers the pre-FOMC drift by about 19 (15) basis
points in the post-1994 (post-1980) sample. Thus up to term premia, the pre-FOMC drift
is lower when investors expect the Fed to tighten policy.
We next assess whether the pre-FOMC returns are related to equity market uncertainty
24In unreported results we also do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant link with the annual growth of nonfarm payroll
employment as well as a simple measure of the output gap constructed from detrended IP as in ?
25We deﬁne tightening cycles as periods between local troughs and peaks of the target federal funds rate
and easing cycles as periods between local peaks and troughs of the target rate or during which the Federal
Reserve conducted large-scale asset purchase programs. The chronology that we obtain at is very similar to
the one in Adrian and Estrella [2008]. A third regime in which the Federal Reserve is neither tightening nor
easing is not included in the regression.
24
=== PAGE 26 ===
as measured by the VIX at the market close two days before the scheduled meetings. As
shown in Column 5, the VIX is strongly signiﬁcant with a coeﬃcient of 0.31 in the 1994-
2011 sample. Hence, a one-standard deviation change in the VIX would have increased the
pre-FOMC return by 31 basis points over that sample. Moreover, the adjusted R2 of the
regression is an impressive 10%. In the longer sample (the VIX is only available starting
in 1990), the coeﬃcient on the two-day lagged level of the VIX drops slightly, but remains
strongly statistically signiﬁcant, and the adjusted R2 of the regression still remains high at
8%.
We next assess whether pre-FOMC returns are related to ex-post monetary policy surprises
as measured by federal funds rate futures and stock market responses (column 6). Fed
funds surprises are constructed as in Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] and G¨ urkaynak, Sack,
and Swanson [2005] over short windows around FOMC announcements from 2pm to 3pm.
For the SPX we use announcement returns over the same window. 26 The coeﬃcients on the
futures-implied policy surprise are statistically and economically zero in both samples. The
coeﬃcient on the stock market surprise is estimated to be negative 12 basis points in the
post-1994 sample, but is also statistically insigniﬁcant.
As evidenced by the one-year moving average of pre-FOMC returns in Figure 3 there seems
to be some persistence in the pre-FOMC return. To assess whether there is time series
predictability of the pre-FOMC returns at low frequencies we regress them on their average
over the past eight FOMC meetings (a variable that we label MA8). We ﬁnd that the
backward-looking moving average is a highly statistically signiﬁcant explanatory variable of
future pre-FOMC returns with a large positive sign for both samples (column 7). Above, we
have found that the slope of the Treasury yield curve and the level of the VIX also predict
some of the time series variation in pre-FOMC returns. In order to assess whether there
is serial correlation in the returns that is not captured by these two variables, we run a
regression that includes the slope, the VIX as well as the past moving average of pre-FOMC
returns as regressors. The results show that all three variables retain their signiﬁcance in the
joint regression in both samples, and explain a sizable fraction of the time series variation
in pre-FOMC returns (column 8).
In sum, pre-FOMC returns tend to be higher when investors expect the Fed to ease its
stance of monetary policy, when implied equity market volatility is high, and when past
pre-FOMC returns have been positive. Below, we attempt to square some of these facts
26From 1994-2011 we follow G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson [2005] and take the change from 2 pm to 3
pm as the surprise measure. Before 1994, we follow Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] and use the daily change
in the contract instead. The return in the SPX is from 2 pm to 3 pm on FOMC announcement days from
1994 onwards and the daily return of the SPX on the day after the FOMC meeting before 1994 as our
equity-based measure of monetary policy surprises.
25
=== PAGE 27 ===
with the predictions of models that feature political risk, investor inattention, learning, or
limited participation in the stock market.
4.2.2 Political Risk, Investor Inattention, and Limited Participation
Pastor and Veronesi [2011] proposed a general equilibrium model in which the public sector
aﬀects stock returns through a policy decision that occurs at speciﬁed dates. In their model,
investors demand a risk premium for being exposed to political uncertainty regarding the
ex-ante unknown policy action. As a result, expected stock returns are higher in periods
when investors receive more signals about likely policy changes. Without these signals, stock
prices in the political risk model would follow a martingale prior to the announcement and
jump at the announcement (driven by a reduction of uncertainty). Hence, learning about
the likely outcome of the announcement distinguishes the political risk story from the pure
jump risk explanation that we dismissed above.
As discussed before, Federal Reserve oﬃcials are subject to a one week purdah period prior
to scheduled FOMC announcements. It is therefore implausible to assume that substantial
new information about the upcoming policy decision is being released in the 24 hours prior to
FOMC announcements. However, media coverage of the Federal Reserve generally picks up
markedly before the meeting as illustrated in Figure A.5 in the Appendix. This chart plots
the time series average of the combined number of articles about the Federal Reserve that
appeared each day in the print issues of the Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times
over a ten day window around FOMC announcements. While typically the largest number of
articles was published the day after FOMC meetings, the ﬁgure shows that media coverage
increased signiﬁcantly on the day of the announcement (meaning that the articles have been
published before the announcement). Thus, to the extent that investors use media reports
to update their beliefs (rather than, for example, speeches by Fed oﬃcials occurring in the
prior weeks), they may indeed receive signals about future Fed policy right ahead of FOMC
announcements and consequently political uncertainty might indeed increase. 27
The model by Pastor and Veronesi [2011] has at least three testable implications that are rel-
evant in our context. First, the political risk premium is larger in weak economic conditions.
Second, stock returns should be more volatile in times of higher political uncertainty. Third,
stock returns should be more cross-correlated prior to policy changes. As we have seen in
Section 4.2.1, the pre-FOMC announcement return is indeed economically slightly larger in
27Related to this interpretation, Tetlock [2011] provides evidence that stale ﬁrm-speciﬁc news predict future
returns, indicating that investors trade based on media articles which contain old information. Huberman
and Regev [2001] and Carvalho, Klagge, and Moench [2011] discuss speciﬁc examples of the large eﬀects of
media reports on individual companies’ stock prices.
26
=== PAGE 28 ===
recessions than in expansions, consistent with the political uncertainty model. However, that
eﬀect is only marginally statistically signiﬁcant in the 1994-2011 sample and is not signiﬁcant
at common levels over the full sample from 1980-2011. The model’s prediction that stock
returns are more volatile in periods of political uncertainty is easily dismissed in our data,
see Figure 6. However, our ﬁnding that a single market factor appears to be able to explain
the cross-sectional variation of industry returns on FOMC announcement days appears to
be in line with the implication of the political risk model that the cross correlation of stocks
should be larger on days of higher political uncertainty.
In sum, the political risk premium model of Pastor and Veronesi—or some slight modiﬁcation
that allows for media as issuers of public signals—qualitatively captures some of our empirical
ﬁndings but appears inconsistent with the pre-FOMC volatility pattern.
Lamont and Frazzini [2007] have recently documented an upward drift in individual stock
prices prior to scheduled earnings announcements. The authors discuss “attention grab-
bing” as a potential behavioral explanation of their ﬁnding. According to this explanation,
investors are more likely to buy stocks which have attracted their attention through me-
dia coverage of forthcoming earnings announcements. Since individual investors are often
short selling constrained, their decision to sell stocks is likely less aﬀected by such events
than their decision to buy stocks. Consequently, information-grabbing events may induce
predictable trading behavior of individual investors. While the pre-earnings announcement
drift is qualitatively similar to the pre-FOMC announcement drift, and we cannot exclude
that such an eﬀect may be at play, it seems unlikely that a bias of small investors could itself
generate such large abnormal returns for the aggregate U.S. and other international stock
markets.
However, investor inattention is not necessarily an irrational phenomenon and even more
sophisticated investors may exhibit some form of inattention. Indeed, as ﬁrst discussed by
Sims [2003], economic agents may face practical constraints as to how much relevant in-
formation they can process in real time. Consequently, they may choose to rationally pay
attention to some signals with higher precision than others. Such a framework of rationally
inattentive investors has recently been employed for example in Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh,
and Veldkamp [2009] to explain the business cycle variation in the relative performance of
mutual fund managers in picking stocks and timing the market. In their model, investors
allocate their attention between a signal about the aggregate and a signal about the idiosyn-
cratic component of cash ﬂows, subject to a constraint. At each point in time, investors
optimally focus on shocks that have the largest impact on returns.
Such a model might qualitatively explain some of our empirical ﬁndings. Indeed, stock
27
=== PAGE 29 ===
market investors may decide to process information about the likely outcome of the FOMC
decision only shortly before the announcement when equity returns are more responsive to
news about monetary policy. At other times, instead, equity investors may focus on some
of the many other factors that aﬀect equity cashﬂows. The increased media coverage of
the Fed right before FOMC announcements documented above is potentially in line with
increased investor attention ahead of the announcement. Hence, provided that the FOMC
announcement, on average, has a positive impact on stock returns, the information process-
ing constraint may result in a drift prior to the announcement, as investors focus on the
announcement only at that time. 28
But why should equity prices react positively to FOMC announcements? In a model with
Bayesian mean-variance investors as in Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp [2009],
stock prices may rise because, after learning the signals, posterior expected mean returns are
higher and/or the posterior variance of payoﬀs is lower. That is, positive signals (relative to
investors’ prior) about a likely policy easing may push equity prices higher. Alternatively,
as investors learn more about the likely policy action, posterior uncertainty is reduced and
stock prices increase. The time-series evidence in Section 4.2.1 suggests that both eﬀects
may be at work. Indeed, we ﬁnd that the pre-FOMC announcement returns are high when
market participants expect the Fed to loosen monetary policy and when the uncertainty
about future Fed policy (as measured by the disagreement among professional forecasters) is
low. Hence, if investors only update their expectations about monetary policy shortly before
the FOMC announcement, then these two eﬀects could well be consistent with the drift that
we observe.
But even if consistent with the time-series pattern, how likely is it that rational inattention
could explain the large unconditional return in our sample? While there may indeed be a
reduction of posterior variance ahead of FOMC meetings as investors become better informed
about monetary policy, the magnitude of this eﬀect would likely be limited. In addition, it is
not clear why a similar eﬀect would not be at play on days of important macroeconomic news
announcements, such as the employment report, when investors observe other informative
signals about the state of the economy. Indeed, as we saw before, these other announcements
do not feature abnormal returns in our sample.
Can higher posterior mean returns explain the large magnitude of the pre-FOMC announce-
ment drift? Our sample from the early 1980s through 2011 featured a secular decline of
policy rates. It is precisely in this sample period that some commentators and academic
papers have thought of central bank policy as having an asymmetric impact on the ﬁnancial
28Fixed income investors, instead, may pay attention to the Fed at all times, as the future path of short
term interest rates is arguably the most important determinant of ﬁxed income returns.
28
=== PAGE 30 ===
sector, with limited negative impact in booms and support in busts (see, for example, Dia-
mond and Rajan [2011]). Even if one might be inclined to argue that this period has been
characterized by such an asymmetry, in a rational expectations equilibrium these investors
should not have been consistently surprised. In other words, unless one is willing to assume
that the Fed systematically surprised equity investors over this period, the higher poste-
rior means channel in the investor inattention model is unlikely to explain the pre-FOMC
announcement drift.
Investor inattention may also give rise to risk premia through time varying stock market
participation. Duﬃe [2010] presents a model where inattentive investors trade only infre-
quently and where frequent investors (specialists) earn a premium for bearing a larger share
of overall market risk around certain events. The original model studies price dynamics
ahead of anticipated supply and demand shocks. In our setup, we consider a slight modiﬁ-
cation and assume that inattentive investors are less likely to trade shortly ahead of FOMC
announcements because of the risk of being at an informational disadvantage over special-
ists. A larger share of the market risk would then be borne by the specialists, and in the
mean-variance setup of Duﬃe [2010], they will demand compensation in the form of higher
expected returns ahead of the announcement. In contrast with the political risk premium
model or the rational inattention setup discussed earlier, in this framework no additional
information or increase in overall uncertainty would be required to boost pre-announcement
returns. Instead, the positive excess return would be exclusively driven by a temporary
reduction of stock market participation.
Qualitatively, such an explanation is appealing as we ﬁnd that both instantaneous volatil-
ity as well as trading volume are somewhat lower just before FOMC announcements, see
Section 4.1. However, the limited participation model would also predict lower returns on
days surrounding FOMC announcements when inattentive investors are still in, or return-
ing to, the market. Yet, as we have shown in Section 3.3, the pre-FOMC returns are very
persistent and not reversed in previous or subsequent trading sessions. Thus, we ﬁnd the lim-
ited participation model to be counterfactual with respect to the persistence of pre-FOMC
returns.
In sum, although we see each of the three theories as somewhat appealing, they appear
counterfactual in some dimensions.
29
=== PAGE 31 ===
5 Conclusion
We have documented that excess returns on U.S. and international equities have been sig-
niﬁcantly higher in anticipation of monetary policy actions taken at scheduled meetings of
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) over the past few decades. The pre-FOMC
returns are not reversed in subsequent trading sessions, are robust to outliers, and their sta-
tistical signiﬁcance is not driven by small sample issues or data-snooping. Since the 1980s,
pre-FOMC returns have increased over time, especially after 1994 when FOMC decisions
became public signals. In both samples, pre-FOMC returns account for large fractions of
realized stock returns. We do not ﬁnd pre-FOMC eﬀects in U.S. Treasuries and in eurodol-
lar or federal funds rate futures, instruments that are highly sensitive to monetary policy.
Other major U.S. macroeconomic news announcements also do not feature abnormal pre-
announcement returns in U.S. stocks. The time series of pre-FOMC returns is somewhat
countercyclical. They also tend to be higher in periods when market participants expect
the Fed to ease policy, as implied by the slope of the Treasury curve, when implied equity
market volatility is higher, and when past pre-FOMC returns have been higher. Combined,
these three factors explain a signiﬁcant fraction of the time series variation of pre-FOMC
returns.
The evidence in this paper suggests that jump risk, and standard consumption-based as-
set pricing models, and an information leakage story do not explain the pre-FOMC drift.
However, we ﬁnd that a share of the pre-FOMC returns may be accounted for by lower trad-
ing volumes and, especially, lower market volatility ahead of FOMC announcements. The
“volatility feedback eﬀect” of Campbell and Hentschel [1992] would be consistent with our
evidence, but only to the extent that the pre-FOMC volatility declines in volatility had been
unexpected. Moreover one would still need to explain the sources of these declines.
We ﬁnally discussed three pricing models that could yield a smooth drift ahead of announce-
ments featuring political risk (Pastor and Veronesi [2011]), rationally inattentive investors
(Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp [2009]), and limited stock market participation
(Duﬃe [2010]). None of these models are fully consistent with all our ﬁndings. The political
risk explanation, with agents learning ahead of the announcement, appears at odds with
the lower volatility of stock returns in the hours before the FOMC announcement, among
other things. Rationally inattentive investors that optimally focus on FOMC-relevant in-
formation only shortly ahead of the announcement may generate a drift either because of
lower posterior variance, as agents update their beliefs, or because of higher posterior mean
returns following positive signal realizations (that is, when signals point to accommodative
policy). Consistent with this theory, we ﬁnd that pre-FOMC returns are higher when the
30
=== PAGE 32 ===
slope of the yield curve implies future rate cuts. However, investors would have had to be
consistently surprised about monetary policy for long periods of time, and signiﬁcantly so,
to quantitatively explain the magnitude of the pre-FOMC return. Finally the time-varying
limited market participation model, which is consistent with the observed liquidity patterns,
would predict that the abnormal returns ahead of the announcement are reversed after the
event. Instead, we ﬁnd the pre-FOMC returns to be persistent. In sum, as of this paper’s
writing, the pre-FOMC announcement drift is a puzzle.
31
=== PAGE 33 ===
References
Acharya, V. V., and L. H. Pedersen (2005): “Asset pricing with liquidity risk,” Journal
of Financial Economics , 77(2), 375–410.
Adrian, T., and A. Estrella (2008): “Monetary tightening cycles and the predictability
of economic activity,” Economics Letters, 99(2), 260–264.
Amihud, Y. (2002): “Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series eﬀects,”
Journal of Financial Markets , 5(1), 31–56.
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson (1986): “Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread,” Journal
of Financial Economics , 17(2), 223–249.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2003): “Micro Ef-
fects of Macro Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 93(1), 38–62.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles,” The Journal of Finance , 59(4), 1481–1509.
Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and X. Zhang (2009): “International Stock Return
Comovements,” The Journal of Finance , 64(6), 2591–2626.
Bernanke, B. S., A. S. Blinder, and B. T. McCallum (2005): “Panel discussion I:
What Have We Learned Since October 1979?,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,
pp. 277–292.
Bernanke, B. S., and K. N. Kuttner (2005): “What Explains the Stock Market’s
Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?,” The Journal of Finance , 60(3), 1221–1257.
Black, F. (1976): “Studies of stock price volatility changes,” in Proceedings of the 1976
Meetings of the American Statistical Association, Business and Economics Statistics Sec-
tion, pp. 177–181.
Blinder, A. S., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. D. Haan, and D.-J. Jansen
(2008): “Central bank communication and monetary policy: A survey of theory and
evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature , 46(4), 910–945.
Campbell, J. Y. (2003): “Consumption-based asset pricing,” in Handbook of the Eco-
nomics of Finance, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. M. Stulz, vol. 1 of Hand-
book of the Economics of Finance , chap. 13, pp. 803–887. Elsevier.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy ,
107(2), 205.
Campbell, J. Y., S. J. Grossman, and J. W ang (1993): “Trading Volume and Serial
Correlation in Stock Returns,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 108(4), 905–39.
Campbell, J. Y., and L. Hentschel (1992): “No news is good news: An asymmetric
32
=== PAGE 34 ===
model of changing volatility in stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics , 31(3),
281–318.
Carvalho, C., N. Klagge, and E. Moench (2011): “The persistent eﬀects of a false
news shock,” Journal of Empirical Finance , 18(4), 597–615.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules And Macroe-
conomic Stability: Evidence And Some Theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics ,
115(1), 147–180.
Diamond, D. W., and R. Rajan (2011): “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest
Rate Policy,” Working Paper 16994, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Duffie, D. (2010): “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capi-
tal,” Journal of Finance , 65(4), 1237–1267.
Ehrmann, M., and M. Fratzscher (2009): “Purdah—On the Rationale for Central
Bank Silence around Policy Meetings,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , 41(23),
517–528.
F ama, E., and K. French (1993): “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds,” Journal of ﬁnancial economics , 33(1), 3–56.
Fleming, M., and M. Piazzesi (2005): “Monetary Policy Tick-by-Tick,” Discussion pa-
per, University of Chicago, mimeo.
Fleming, M. J., and E. M. Remolona (1999): “Price Formation and Liquidity in the
U.S. Treasury Market: The Response to Public Information,” The Journal of Finance ,
54(5), 1901–1915.
Forbes, K. J., and R. Rigobon (2002): “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measur-
ing Stock Market Comovements,” Journal of Finance , 57(5), 2223–2261.
G¨urkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005): “Do Actions Speak Louder
Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,”
International Journal of Central Banking .
Gurkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright (2007): “The U.S. Treasury yield
curve: 1961 to the present,” Journal of Monetary Economics , 54(8), 2291–2304.
Huberman, G., and T. Regev (2001): “Contagious Speculation and a Cure for Cancer:
A Nonevent that Made Stock Prices Soar,” Journal of Finance , 56(1), 387–396.
Jones, C. M., O. Lamont, and R. L. Lumsdaine (1998): “Macroeconomic news and
bond market volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics , 47(3), 315 – 337.
Kacperczyk, M., S. V. Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp (2009): “Rational Atten-
tion Allocation Over the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Papers 15450, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Karolyi, G. A., and R. M. Stulz (1996): “Why Do Markets Move Together? An
33
=== PAGE 35 ===
Investigation of U.S.-Japan Stock Return Comovements,” The Journal of Finance , 51(3),
pp. 951–986.
Kuttner, K. N. (2001): “Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the
Fed funds futures market,” Journal of Monetary Economics , 47(3), 523–544.
(2003): “The Revelation of Funds Rate Changes, 1989-92: What Did the Markets
Know, and When Did They Know It?,” unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
Lamont, O., and A. Frazzini (2007): “The Earnings Announcement Premium and Trad-
ing Volume,” NBER Working Papers 13090, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Lucca, D. O., and F. Trebbi (2009): “Measuring Central Bank Communication: An
Automated Approach with Application to FOMC Statements,” NBER Working Papers
15367, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Pan, J. (2002): “The jump-risk premia implicit in options: evidence from an integrated
time-series study,” Journal of Financial Economics , 63(1), 3–50.
Pastor, L., and R. F. Stambaugh (2003): “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Political Economy , 111(3), 642–685.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi (2011): “Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia,” NBER
Working Papers 17464, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Savor, P., and M. Wilson (2010): “How Much Do Investors Care About Macroeconomic
Risk? Evidence From Scheduled Economic Announcements,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
(2012): “Asset Pricing: A Tale of Two Days,” Working paper, The University of
Pennsylvania.
Shanken, J. (1992): “On the Estimation of Beta-Pricing Models,” Review of Financial
Studies, 5(1), 1–33.
Sims, C. (2003): “Implications of rational inattention,” Journal of Monetary Economics ,
50(3), 665–690.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (2006): “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?,”
American Economic Review, 96(1), 54–81.
Tetlock, P. C. (2011): “All the News That’s Fit to Reprint: Do Investors React to Stale
Information?,” Review of Financial Studies , 24(5), 1481–1512.
White, H. (2000): “A Reality Check for Data Snooping,” Econometrica, 68(5), 1097–1126.
34
=== PAGE 36 ===
Figure 1: Cumulative Returns on the SPX
0.51Percent09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMCnon-FOMC
Notes: This chart plots the average cumulative one-minute return on the S&P500 index (SPX) over a
three day window. The solid black line shows the average cumulative return on the SPX from 9:30 a.m.
EST on the days before scheduled FOMC announcements until 4:00 p.m. EST on days after scheduled
FOMC announcements. The dashed black line shows the cumulative return on the SPX over all other three
day windows. The gray shaded areas denote the pointwise 95% conﬁdence bands around the two means,
respectively. The sample period is from September 1994 through March 2011. The dashed vertical red line
is set at 2:15 p.m. EST, the time when FOMC announcements were typically released during that period.
35
=== PAGE 37 ===
Figure 2: Empirical Densities of 2pm-to-2pm SPX Returns: 1994-2011
0.2.4.6Density-15-10-505102pm-to-2pm %log-return on the SPX FOMCnonFOMC
Notes: This chart plots empirical densities of the 2pm-to-2pm return on the SPX. The solid black line
shows the return on days ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements and the gray line shows the return on
average cumulative return all other days. The sample period is from September 1994 through March 2011.
36
=== PAGE 38 ===
Figure 3: Time Series of pre-FOMC Announcement Returns on the SPX
10/29/0805101520Rates in percent-50510Returns in percent19801981198219831984198519861987198819891990199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005200620072008200920102011pre-FOMCpre-FOMC (12m MA)Other days (12m MA)Fed funds rate (monthly, right-axis)
Notes: This chart plots the time series of pre-FOMC announcement returns (post-1994: cum dividend log
excess return on the S&P500 from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement to 2 pm on that
day, pre-1994 daily close-to-close cum dividend log excess return on the SPX on days of scheduled FOMC
meetings) from Jan 1980 through Mar 2011. The solid black line shows the one-year moving average of these
returns. The red line is the one-year moving average of 24 hour returns on all non pre-FOMC days. The
grey line is the monthly average of the eﬀective federal funds rate.
37
=== PAGE 39 ===
Figure 4: CAPM for Industry and Size Portfolios on FOMC Announcement Days
AEROAGRICAUTOSBANKSBEERBLDMTBOOKSBOXESBUSSVCHEMSCHIPSCLTHSCNSTRCOALDRUGSELCEQFABPRFINFOODFUNGOLDGUNSHARDWHLTHHSHLDINSURLABEQMACHMEALSMEDEQMINESOILOTHERPAPERPERSVRLESTRTAILRUBBRSHIPSSMOKESODASOFTWSTEELTELCMTOYSTRANSTXTLSUTILWHLSLDEC1DEC10DEC2DEC3DEC4DEC5DEC6DEC7DEC8DEC9-.20.2.4.6.8Predicted Excess Return-.20.2.4.6.8Actual Excess Return
Notes: This chart documents the ﬁt of the CAPM for the 49 Fama-French industry portfolios and the ten
size decile portfolios on FOMC announcement days. For each portfolio, the horizontal axis shows the average
excess return earned on scheduled FOMC announcement days (in percent) whereas the vertical axis shows
the excess return implied by the CAPM. The sample period is from September 1994 through December
2010. The betas are estimated from a regression of the portfolio’s excess return on the excess return of the
market portfolio at the daily frequency (using all days in the sample). The result from the second stage
cross sectional regression is
¯RF OM C = −.099[0.10] + 0.468[0.149] ˆβ
where the standard errors are adjusted for the estimation error in betas following Shanken [1992]. The R2
of the regression is 65%. The dashed line shows the estimated regression line and the solid black line shows
the 45 degree line.
38
=== PAGE 40 ===
Figure 5: Cumulative Returns on International Stock Market Indexes Around FOMC
Announcements
0.2.4.6.8Percent09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30SPXFTSEDAXCAC40SMIIBEXTSX
Notes: This chart plots the average cumulative one-minute return on the SPX and other major international
equity market indexes over the three day window around scheduled FOMC announcements. The solid black
line shows the average cumulative return on the SPX from 9:30 a.m. EST on the days before scheduled
FOMC announcements until 4:00 p.m. on days after scheduled FOMC announcements. The colored dashed
lines show the cumulative returns on the German DAX, the U.K.’s FTSE100, the French CAC40, the Spanish
IBEX, the Swiss SMI, and the Canadian TSX over the same three day window. All stock indexes are only
shown during hours of trading on the respective exchanges. The sample period is from January 1996 through
March 2011. The dashed vertical red line is set at 2:15 p.m. EST, the time when FOMC announcements
were typically released during that period.
39
=== PAGE 41 ===
Figure 6: Intraday Realized V olatility of SPX Returns
05.00e-071.00e-061.50e-062.00e-06Returns squared09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMCnon-FOMC
Notes: This chart documents the pattern of intraday realized volatility over the three day window around
scheduled FOMC announcements. The solid black line shows the ﬁve minute rolling sum of squared tick-
by-tick returns on the SPX from 9:30 a.m. EST on the days before scheduled FOMC announcements until
4:00 p.m. on EST days after scheduled FOMC announcements. The sample period is from September 1994
through March 2011. The dashed black line shows the same object over all other three day windows. Shaded
areas represent pointwise 95% conﬁdence bands around the mean.
40
=== PAGE 42 ===
Figure 7: Intraday T rading V olumes for the E-mini SP500 F uture
012345Relative Trading Volumes09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMCnon-FOMC
Notes: This chart documents the pattern of intraday trading volume of E-mini SP500 futures over the
three day window around scheduled FOMC announcements. The solid black line shows the ﬁve minute
rolling average of the number of contracts traded from 9:30 a.m. EST on the days before scheduled FOMC
announcements until 4:00 p.m. EST on days after scheduled FOMC announcements. The sample period is
from January 1996 through March 2011. The dashed black line shows the same object over all other three
day windows. Shaded areas represent pointwise 95% conﬁdence bands around the mean.
41
=== PAGE 43 ===
T able 1: Summary Statistics
FOMC non-FOMC
Mean St.Dev. Max Min N.Obs. Mean St.Dev. Max Min N.Obs.
Post-1994 sample
SPX-2pm .488 1.215 9.531 -2.927 131 .004 1.218 12.064 -13.962 4010
SPX .338 1.144 5.006 -2.571 132 .009 1.261 10.953 -9.464 4043
DAX .449 1.222 4.418 -3.241 131 .014 1.571 10.797 -9.791 3965
FTSE100 .347 1.204 7.744 -3.492 132 .004 1.222 9.384 -9.266 3968
CAC40 .517 1.422 8.833 -2.538 132 -.001 1.49 10.595 -9.472 3970
IBEX .491 1.369 9.002 -3.449 132 .013 1.489 13.484 -9.586 3939
SMI .301 1.141 5.992 -3.016 132 .012 1.258 10.788 -8.108 3942
TSX .231 .981 3.752 -2.06 131 .022 1.156 9.37 -9.788 3956
NKY .006 1.806 7.456 -11.153 125 -.02 1.579 13.235 -12.111 3818
FF -.005 .034 .125 -.155 132 -.001 .026 .355 -.52 4032
ED4 .006 .07 .37 -.26 132 -.001 .08 .83 -.435 4193
TSY-3M .000 .043 .144 -.15 132 -.001 .06 .84 -.78 4078
TSY-2Y .005 .047 .185 -.192 132 -.002 .064 .585 -.607 4193
TSY-5Y -.001 .047 .142 -.166 132 -.001 .067 .517 -.382 4193
TSY-10Y -.003 .044 .124 -.175 132 -.001 .062 .349 -.37 4193
VOLUME .825 .351 2.675 .294 120 1.041 .419 5.283 .129 3686
lVIX-2pm 23.612 9.501 75.52 11.04 121 23.108 9.092 80.69 9.69 3855
Post-1980 sample
SPX-pre .366 1.124 9.531 -2.927 244 .011 1.123 12.064 -22.911 7598
FF -.004 .031 .125 -.155 171 -.002 .03 .38 -.52 5431
ED4 .007 .082 .46 -.26 193 -.001 .085 .83 -1.18 6261
TSY-3M -.011 .106 .54 -.68 245 -.001 .109 1.69 -1.13 7622
TSY-2Y -.005 .08 .37 -.52 245 -.001 .092 .89 -.84 7741
TSY-5Y -.006 .074 .42 -.37 245 -.001 .086 .72 -.77 7741
TSY-10Y -.009 .07 .33 -.33 245 -.001 .08 .65 -.75 7741
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the variables used in this paper on FOMC days and non-
FOMC days. The sample period is 1994:09-2011:03 in the top panel and 1980:01-2011:03 in the bottom panel.
SPX-2pm denotes the cum-dividend log excess return on the S&P500 index from 2pm the previous day to 2pm
the current day. SPX denotes the close-to-close log excess return on the S&P500 index. DAX, FTSE100,
CAC40, IBEX, SMI, TSX and NIKKEI denote the close-to-close cum-dividend log excess returns on the
German, British, French, Spanish, Swiss, Canadian, and Japanese benchmark stock indexes, respectively.
FF and ED4 are the daily rate changes implied by the ﬁrst (and second) Federal funds futures contract in
the ﬁrst two-thirds (last third) of the month as well as the fourth Eurodollar contract. Tsy3M,...,Tsy10y
are the daily rate changes for the respective on-the-run Treasury bills and notes for the 2-year and 10-year
maturity. VOLUME denotes the trading volume (number of shares traded) for the SPY relative to its past
21-day moving average. lVIX is the level of the VIX at 2 pm on the previous day. SPX-pre and all other
rate changes in the post-1980 sample are based on 2pm-to-2pm in the post-1994 sample and close-to-close
on the day of the FOMC meeting (day before FOMC news) in the 1980-1993 sample.
=== PAGE 44 ===
T able 2: Main Regression Table: Daily SP500 excess returns
Dependent V ariable: %Log-return on SP500 stock market index
Type of return: 2pm-to-2pm 2pm-to-close close-to-close close-to-2pm close(t-2)-to-2pm
pre-FOMC dummy 0 .488 0 .485 0.335 0 .544
[0.11]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.06]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗∗∗
FOMC dummy 0.002 0 .330
[0.09] [0 .10]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .004 0.009
[0.02] [0.02]
Annual ex-return FOMC 3 .89 2.70
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 0 .88 2.08
Sharpe Ratio 1 .14 1 .14 0.01 0 .84 1 .43 0 .98
Obs. 131 4141 131 4175 131 131
N. of FOMC 131 131 131 132 131 131
Notes: This table summarized results for the (pre-)FOMC dummy variable regression 1 using cum dividend log excess returns
on the S&P500 over diﬀerent windows as the dependent variables. Corresponding to the columns, the dependent variables are:
(1&2) the cum dividend log excess return on the S&P500 from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement to 2 pm
on that day, (3) the cum dividend log excess return on the S&P500 from 2pm on days of scheduled FOMC announcements until
the market close on those days, (4) the excess return on the S&P500 from the market close the day before until the market close
on the day of scheduled FOMC announcements, (5) the excess return on the S&P500 from the market close the day before until
2 pm on the day of scheduled FOMC announcements, and (6) the excess return on the S&P500 from the market close two days
before scheduled FOMC announcements until 2 pm on the day of scheduled FOMC announcements. “pre-FOMC dummy” is a
variable that takes on the value of one when a scheduled FOMC announcement has been released in the following 24 hour interval
and zero otherwise. “FOMC dummy” is a variable that takes on the value of one when a scheduled FOMC announcement has been
released in the return window studied. “Annual ex-return FOMC” is the cumulative annual excess return earned in the 24 hours
pre-FOMC trading window and “Annual ex-return non-FOMC” is the cumulative annual excess return earned on all other days in
the year. “FOMC Sharpe Ratio” is the annualized Sharpe-ratio on pre-FOMC returns. The sample period is from Sep 1, 1994 to
Mar 30, 2011. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
43
=== PAGE 45 ===
T able 3: Daily SP500 excess returns: Alternative samples
Dependent V ariable: %Log-excess-return on SP500 stock market index
pre-FOMC dummy 0 .167 0 .005 0 .204 0 .355
[0.04]∗∗∗ [0.04] [0 .09]∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .009 0 .006 0 .020 0 .011
[0.01] [0 .01] [0 .02] [0 .01]
Annual ex-return FOMC 1 .81 0 .16 1 .81 2 .87
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 2 .27 1 .45 4 .98 2 .80
Sharpe Ratio 0 .53 0 .04 0 .64 0 .92
Obs. 12854 5012 3539 7842
N. of FOMC 524 280 113 244
Samples 196001 .201103 196001.197912 198001.199312 198001.201103
Notes: This table reports pre-FOMC dummy variable regression results for diﬀerent subsamples, as given
in the row labeled “Sample”. From Sep 1994 onwards, the dependent variable is the cum dividend log excess
return on the S&P500 from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement to 2 pm on that day.
Before 1994, the dependent variable is the excess return on the S&P500 from the market close the day before
until the market close on the day of scheduled FOMC meetings. “pre-FOMC dummy” is a variable that takes
on the value of one when a scheduled FOMC announcement has been released in the following 24 hour interval
from 1994 onwards, on days of scheduled FOMC meetings (before the policy decision could have been known
to market participants) before 1994, and zero otherwise. “Annual ex-return FOMC” is the cumulative annual
excess return earned in the 24 hours pre-FOMC trading window and “Annual ex-return non-FOMC” is the
cumulative annual excess return earned on all other days in the year. “FOMC Sharpe Ratio” is the annualized
Sharpe-ratio on pre-FOMC returns.*** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust
standard error shown in brackets.
44
=== PAGE 46 ===
T able 4: SP500 returns before, at, or after the FOMC news
FOMC news at: Post-1994 sample Post-1980 sample
t + 6 -0.02 [0.09] 0.04 [0.06]
t + 5 -0.10 [0.10] -0.07 [0.06]
t + 4 0.09 [0.09] 0.03 [0.06]
t + 3 -0.06 [0.09] 0.04 [0.07]
t + 2 0.06 [0.08] -0.02 [0.06]
t + 1 (pre-FOMC) 0.49*** [0.11] 0.37*** [0.07]
t 0.04 [0.12] 0.06 [0.07]
t − 1 -0.02 [0.10] 0.05 [0.07]
t − 2 0.08 [0.11] 0.09 [0.07]
t − 3 -0.03 [0.10] -0.08 [0.07]
t − 4 -0.08 [0.08] 0.03 [0.06]
∑6
i=2 (FOMC at t +i) -0.041 0.027
P-value 0.842 0.853∑4
i=0 (FOMC at t −i) -0.018 0.147
P-value 0.939 0.335
Notes: This table reports results for dummy variable regressions analyzing
average excess returns in the S&P500 before, on, and after days of scheduled
FOMC meetings. The sample in the left panel starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends
on Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variable in that panel is the cum dividend log
excess return on the S&P500 from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC
announcement to 2 pm on that day. The sample in the right panel starts on
Jan 2, 1980 and ends on Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variable in that panel
is the cum dividend log excess return on the S&P500 on the day of a scheduled
FOMC meeting. FOMC news at t +i (t −i) denotes a dummy that takes on
the value of 1 i trading sessions before (after) the scheduled FOMC meeting
day. ∑6
i=2 1(FOMC t+i) denotes the sum of the coeﬃcients on the dummy
variables for the ﬁve days before while ∑4
i=0 1(FOMC t−i) denotes the sum of
coeﬃcients on the dummy variables for the ﬁve days after FOMC news became
available. Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at
5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
45
=== PAGE 47 ===
T able 5: Summary Statistics: 2pm-to-2pm SP500 excess returns
All Observations Excl. top/bottom 1
FOMC nonFOMC FOMC nonFOMC
Mean .488 .004 .445 .008
[.11] [.02] [.08] [.02]
St. Dev. 1.22 1.22 .88 .99
Skew 3.18 -.24 .61 -.16
Kurtosis 25.61 15.91 5.22 3.71
Max 9.53 12.06 3.69 3.08
Min -2.93 -13.96 -2.18 -3.25
Obs. 131 4010 129 3930
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the 2pm-2pm
log excess returns on the SPX on FOMC days and non-FOMC
days. Standard errors for the mean are reported in square brack-
ets. “Obs.” is the number of observations in each subset of days.
The sample period is Sep, 1 1994 to Mar 31, 2011.
46
=== PAGE 48 ===
T able 6: International Stock Market Index Regressions
Dependent V ariable: %Log-return of stock market indexes
Stock Market Index: DAX FTSE100 CAC40 IBEX SMI TSX NIKKEI
Post-1994 sample
pre-FOMC Dummy 0 .43 0 .34 0 .52 0 .48 0 .29 0 .21 0 .03
[0.11]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.09]∗∗ [0.16]
Const. 0 .01 0 .00 −0.00 0 .01 0 .01 0 .02 −0.02
[0.02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .03]
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 1 .04 0 .81 1 .03 1 .01 0 .75 0 .67 0 .01
Obs. 4096 4100 4102 4071 4074 4087 3943
N. of FOMC 131 132 132 132 132 131 125
Post-1980 sample
pre-FOMC dummy 0 .16 0 .21 0 .38 0 .38 0 .20 0 .14 0 .03
[0.08]∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.09]∗∗ [0.06]∗∗ [0.11]
Const. 0 .03 0 .02 0 .01 0 .01 0 .02 0 .02 0 .00
[0.02]∗ [0.01] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .01]∗ [0.02]
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .44 0 .57 0 .78 0 .79 0 .55 0 .54 0 .05
Observations 7686 6753 5842 5930 5585 7716 7453
N. of FOMC 244 211 182 185 175 241 235
Sample 198001 .201103 198401.201103 198707.201103 198701.201103 198807.201103 198001.201103 198001.201103
Notes: This table reports estimates of pre-FOMC dummy coeﬃcients for daily close-to-close returns on the German DAX, the British FTSE 100,
the French CAC40, the Spanish IBEX, the Swiss SMI, the Canadian TSX index, and the Japanese NIKKEI 225. The sample in the upper panel
starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 31, 2011. Samples in the lower panel diﬀer across indexes depending on data availability and are given in
the row labeled “Sample”. “Observations” denotes the total number of trading days in each sample. “N. of FOMC” denotes the total number of
scheduled FOMC meeting days in each sample. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in
brackets.
47
=== PAGE 49 ===
T able 7: Fixed Income
Instrument: FF ED-4 TREAS-3M TREAS-2Y TREAS-5Y TREAS-10Y
Post-1994 sample
pre-FOMC dummy 0 .001 0 .007 0 .001 0 .006 0 .001 −0.002
[0.00] [0 .01] [0 .00] [0 .00] [0 .00] [0 .00]
Const. −0.002 −0.001 −0.001 −0.002 −0.001 −0.001
[0.00]∗∗∗ [0.00] [0 .00] [0 .00] [0 .00] [0 .00]
Obs. 4322 4325 4210 4325 4325 4325
N. of FOMC 131 132 132 132 132 132
Post-1980 sample
pre-FOMC dummy 0 .002 0 .008 −0.010 −0.004 −0.006 −0.009
[0.00] [0 .01] [0 .01] [0 .01] [0 .00] [0 .00]∗
Const. −0.002 −0.001 −0.001 −0.001 −0.001 −0.001
[0.00]∗∗∗ [0.00] [0 .00] [0 .00] [0 .00] [0 .00]
Obs. 5765 6454 7867 7986 7986 7986
N. of FOMC 170 193 245 245 245 245
Dates 198812 .201103 198604.201103 198001.201103 198001.201103 198001.201103 198001.201103
Notes: This table reports pre-FOMC announcement dummy variable regressions for some U.S. ﬁxed income assets, discussed
in Section 3.7. “pre-FOMC dummy” is a variable that takes on the value of one if the next 24 hour trading interval comprises
a scheduled FOMC announcement, and zero otherwise. The sample in the top panel starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 30,
2011. The dependent variables over that sample are yield changes in percent from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC
announcement to 2 pm on the announcement day. The samples in the bottom panel diﬀer depending on the data availability but
start no earlier than Jan 2, 1980 and all end on Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variables in this sample are close-to-close yield
changes in percent on the day prior to the announcement prior to 1994, and yield changes in percent from 2pm on the day before a
scheduled FOMC announcement to 2 pm on the announcement day after 1994. “FF” are rates implied by the front (next month)
in the ﬁrst two-thirds (last-third) of each month. “ED-4” is the 4th eurodollar implied rate. Variables denoted “TREAS” refer to
yields on the 3m, 2y, 5y and 10y benchmark Treasury issues.*** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust
standard error shown in brackets.
48
=== PAGE 50 ===
T able 8: ENI Regressions
Dependent V ariable: %Log-return of SP500 stock market index
Event: NFPAY INCLM GDPADV ISM IP HSTART PPI CPI PI ALL
Post-1994 sample
pre-News Dummy −0.08 −0.01 0 .07 −0.09 0 .01 0 .13 −0.10 −0.09 −0.01 −0.04
[0.09] [0 .05] [0 .14] [0 .08] [0 .09] [0 .09] [0 .08] [0 .10] [0 .08] [0 .04]
No. of events 198 861 66 199 211 197 204 206 201 1866
Post-1980 sample
pre-News Dummy −0.08 0 .04 0 .02 0 .04 0 .01 −0.02 −0.11 −0.08 0 .04 −0.00
[0.06] [0 .03] [0 .10] [0 .05] [0 .06] [0 .08] [0 .06]∗ [0.07] [0 .05] [0 .03]
No. of events 369 1627 125 375 386 372 375 381 374 3561
Notes: This table reports pre-announcement dummy variable regressions for various macroeconomic news announcements as discussed in
Section 3.7. The dependent variable is the daily close-to-close cum dividend log excess return on the S&P500. The sample in the top panel
starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 30, 2011. The sample in the bottom panel start on Jan 2, 1980 and ends on Mar 30, 2011. The
table does not report the coeﬃcient on a constant, which is included in each regression. The macroeconomic releases are: Employment Report
(NFPAY), Initial Claims (INCLM), Advance GDP (GDPADV), ISM manufacturing index (ISM), Industrial Production (IP), Housing Starts
(HS), Producer Price Index (PPI), Consumer Price Index (CPI), Personal Income (PI), and All economic releases (ALL).*** signiﬁcant at 1%,
** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
49
=== PAGE 51 ===
T able 9: Time series regressions (post-1994)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
NBER Dummy 0 .62
[0.33]∗
∆12Log(IP) −0.13
[0.12]
∆12Log(CPI) −0.03
[0.13]
Tight. Cycle 0 .06
[0.14]
Ease Cycle 0 .48
[0.32]
Level −0.04
[0.11]
Slope −0.19 −0.23
[0.10]∗ [0.08]∗∗∗
VIX 0 .31 0 .26
[0.08]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗
SPX surprise −0.12
[0.10]
Kuttner Surprise 0 .04
[0.10]
pre-FOMC(MA8) 0.28 0 .17
[0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08] ∗ ∗
Const. 0 .33 0 .42 0 .33 0 .42 0 .42 0 .42 0 .42 0 .42
[0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
Adjusted R2 0 .05 0 .01 0 .02 0 .02 0 .10 0 .01 0 .08 0 .18
Obs. 130 130 130 130 130 130 130 130
Notes: This table reports results for regressions of the time series of pre-FOMC announcement returns on various explanatory variables,
discussed in Section 4.2.1. The sample starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variable is a time series of cum
dividend log excess returns on the S&P500 from 2pm on days before to 2 pm on days of scheduled FOMC announcements. “NBER
Dummy” is a variable that takes on the value of one when the corresponding FOMC day falls into a recession as deﬁned by the NBER
and zero otherwise. “∆ 12Log(IP)” denotes the 12-month log change of the real-time Industrial Production Index, “∆ 12Log(CPI)” is the
12-month log change of the real-time Consumer Price Index. “Ease Cycle” and “Tight. Cycle” are dummy variables that take on the value
of one if the corresponding observation can be classiﬁed as falling into a period of monetary loosening or tightening, respectively. “Level”
and “Slope” are the ﬁrst two principal components from the cross-section of daily one through ﬁve year zero-coupon Treasury yields from
Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright [2007], lagged by two days with respect to the FOMC announcement day. “VIX” is the level of the VIX
index at the market close two days before the scheduled meeting. “Kuttner Surprise” is a monetary policy surprise measure constructed
as in Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] and G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson [2005] over short windows around FOMC announcements from
2pm to 3pm. “SPX surprise” is the 2pm-to-3pm FOMC announcement return on the SPX. “pre-FOMC(MA8)” is the moving average of
pre-FOMC returns over the past eight meetings. Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at
10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
50
=== PAGE 52 ===
T able 10: Time series regressions (post-1980)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
NBER Dummy 0 .20
[0.21]
∆12Log(IP) −0.05
[0.07]
∆12Log(CPI) −0.01
[0.08]
Tight. Cycle Dummy 0 .00
[0.14]
Easing Cycle Dummy 0 .02
[0.15]
Level −0.05
[0.07]
Slope −0.15 −0.17
[0.06] ∗ ∗ [0.07] ∗ ∗
VIX 0.26 0 .19
[0.08]∗∗∗ [0.09] ∗ ∗
SPX surprise −0.06
[0.09]
Kuttner Surprise 0.02
[0.07]
pre-FOMC(MA8) 0.18 0 .13
[0.06]∗∗∗ [0.07] ∗ ∗
Const. 0 .29 0 .33 0 .32 0 .33 0 .37 0 .35 0 .33 0 .33
[0.06]∗∗∗ [0.06]∗∗∗ [0.09]∗∗∗ [0.06]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.06]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
Adjusted R2 0 .00 −0.01 −0.01 0 .02 0 .08 −0.01 0 .03 0 .12
Obs. 243 243 243 243 161 169 243 161
N. of FOMC 243 243 243 243 161 169 243 161
Sample 198001 .201103 198001 .201103 198001 .201103 198001 .201103 199002 .201103 198811 .201103 198001 .201103 199002 .201103
Notes: This table reports results for regressions of the time series of pre-FOMC announcement returns on various explanatory variables for the sample
period 1980-2011, discussed in Section 4.2.1. The dependent variable is a time series of cum dividend log excess returns on the S&P500 from 2pm on days
before to 2 pm on days of scheduled FOMC announcements starting in 1994, and of close-to-close cum dividend log excess returns on the S&P500 on days
of scheduled FOMC meetings before 1994. “NBER Dummy” is a variable that takes on the value of one when the corresponding FOMC day falls into
a recession as deﬁned by the NBER and zero otherwise. “∆ 12Log(IP)” denotes the 12-month log change of the real-time Industrial Production Index,
“∆12Log(CPI)” is the 12-month log change of the real-time Consumer Price Index. “Ease Cycle” and “Tight. Cycle” are dummy variables that take on
the value of one if the corresponding observation can be classiﬁed as falling into a period of monetary loosening or tightening, respectively. “Level” and
“Slope” are the ﬁrst two principal components from the cross-section of daily one through ﬁve year zero-coupon Treasury yields from Gurkaynak, Sack,
and Wright [2007], lagged by two days with respect to the FOMC announcement day. “VIX” is the level of the VIX index at the market close two days
before the scheduled meeting. “Kuttner Surprise” is a monetary policy surprise measure constructed as in Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] and G¨ urkaynak,
Sack, and Swanson [2005] over short windows around FOMC announcements from 2pm to 3pm. “SPX surprise” is the 2pm-to-3pm FOMC announcement
return on the SPX. “pre-FOMC(MA8)” is the moving average of pre-FOMC returns over the past eight meetings. Depending on data availability, the
sample periods may diﬀer across the various explanatory variables, as indicated by the row labeled “Sample”. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%,
*signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
51
=== PAGE 53 ===
T able 11: Liquidity and Volatility Risk
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
pre-FOMC dummy 0 .53 0 .43 0 .33 0 .32 0 .52
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
Trade Vol (innov.) −0.69 −0.05
[0.06]∗∗∗ [0.04]
Trade Vols (lag) 0 .15 −0.03 −0.03
[0.06]∗∗∗ [0.03] [0 .03]
VIX (innov.) −0.60 −0.60
[0.02]∗∗∗ [0.02]∗∗∗
VIX (lag) 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00
[0.00] [0 .00] [0 .00]
Trade Vols. (FOMC-innov.) −0.05
[0.04]
VIX (FOMC-innov.) −0.60
[0.02]∗∗∗
Const. −0.00 −0.15 −0.07 −0.04 −0.05
[0.02] [0 .06]∗∗∗ [0.06] [0 .07] [0 .07]
Adjusted R2 0 .01 0 .05 0 .68 0 .68 0 .68
Obs. 3771
N. of FOMC 119
Notes: This table reports results for regression 1 controlling for measures of liquidity and volatility. The
dependent variable is the cum dividend 2pm-to-2pm log excess return on the S&P500. The sample period
starts at Jan 2, 1996 and ends at Mar 30, 2011. “pre-FOMC dummy” is a dummy variable that takes on
the value of one if there is a scheduled FOMC announcement in the next 24 hour trading interval. “Trade
Vol (innov.)” denotes the residual from an AR(1) regression of the relative trading volume on the SPDR
S&P500 exchange-traded fund (SPY) as of 2 pm on a constant and its previous 2 pm level. “Trade Vols
(lag)” denotes the prior day 2 pm level. “VIX (innov.)” denotes the residual from an AR(1) regression of
the VIX index at 2 pm on a constant and its previous day 2 pm level. “VIX (lag)” denotes day 2 pm level
of the VIX index on the previous trading day. “Trade Vols. (FOMC-innov.)” and “VIX (FOMC-innov.)”
denote residuals from the same AR(1) regressions augmented with the pre-FOMC dummy. *** signiﬁcant
at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
52
=== PAGE 54 ===
A Additional Figures and Tables
Figure A.1: Number of FOMC Meetings Per Y ear
5101520Number of meetings per year196019701980199020002010All meetingsScheduled only
Notes: This chart plots time series of the number of scheduled and the total number of scheduled and
unscheduled FOMC meetings per year from 1960 - 2011.
53
=== PAGE 55 ===
Figure A.2: Empirical Densities of pre-FOMC Returns: 1980-2011
0.1.2.3.4.5Density-20-10010%log-return on the SPX FOMCnonFOMC
Notes: This chart plots empirical densities of the 2pm-to-2pm return on the SPX. The solid black line
shows the return on days ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements and the gray line shows the return on
average cumulative return all other days. The sample period is from January 1980 through March 2011.
54
=== PAGE 56 ===
Figure A.3: Bootstrap Analysis 1994-2011
Bootstrapped standard errors for FOMC dummy Sampling from non-FOMC Returns
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Mean: 0.485, StDev: 0.108
−0.5 −0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
p−value of Mean > average pre−FOMC return (0.488): 1
Zero-Mean Pseudo Pre-FOMC Return Distribution Data-Snooping
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
p−value of Mean > average pre−FOMC return (0.488): 0.9999
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
p−value of max(abs(t−stat)) > 4.51:  0.9998
Notes: This Figure provides histograms of the bootstrap distributions discussed in Section 3.4 for the
sample period Sep 1994 - Mar 2011.
55
=== PAGE 57 ===
Figure A.4: Bootstrap Analysis 1980-2011
Bootstrapped standard errors for FOMC dummy Sampling from non-FOMC Returns
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Mean: 0.355, StDev: 0.0731
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
p−value of Mean > average pre−FOMC return (0.366): 1
Zero-Mean Pseudo Pre-FOMC Return Distribution Data-Snooping
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
p−value of Mean > average pre−FOMC return (0.366): 1
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
p−value of max(abs(t−stat)) > 4.86:  0.9999
Notes: This Figure provides histograms of the bootstrap distributions discussed in Section 3.4 for the
sample period Jan 1980 - Mar 2011.
56
=== PAGE 58 ===
Figure A.5: Number of Fed-related articles in WSJ&FT around FOMC Announcement Days
01234Number of articles-6-5-4-3-2-10123456Days
Notes: This chart plots the average number of articles that appear in the print issues of the Wall Street
Journal and the Financial Times around days of scheduled FOMC announcements. The gray shaded area
shows the two standard error deviation bands around the average. The sample period is from February 1994
through March 2011.
57
=== PAGE 59 ===
T able A.1: Scheduled FOMC meeting dates and times 1994-2011
year 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
1994 4-Feb-94 e 22-Mar-94e 17-May-94e 6-Jul-94e 16-Aug-94e 27-Sep-94 15-Nov-94 20-Dec-94
[11:05] [14:20] [14:26] [14:18] [13:17] [14:18] [14:20] [14:17]
1995 1-Feb-95 28-Mar-95 23-May-95 6-Jul-95 22-Aug-95 26-Sep-95 15-Nov-95 19-Dec-95
[14:14] [14:13] [14:13] [14:15] [14:13] [14:14] [14:16] [14:15]
1996 31-Jan-96 26-Mar-96 e 21-May-96 3-Jul-96 20-Aug-96 24-Sep-96 13-Nov-96 17-Dec-96
[14:16] [11:39] [14:16] [14:14] [14:17] [14:14] [14:17] [14:16]
1997 5-Feb-97 25-Mar-97 20-May-97 2-Jul-97 19-Aug-97 30-Sep-97 12-Nov-97 16-Dec-97
[14:13] [14:14] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15] [14:13] [14:12] [14:15]
1998 4-Feb-98 31-Mar-98 19-May-98 1-Jul-98 18-Aug-98 29-Sep-98 17-Nov-98 22-Dec-98
[14:12] [14:14] [14:13] [14:14] [14:12] [14:17] [14:19] [14:13]
1999 3-Feb-99 30-Mar-99 18-May-99 30-Jun-99 24-Aug-99 5-Oct-99 16-Nov-99 21-Dec-99
[14:12] [14:12] [14:11] [14:15] [14:14] [14:12] [14:16] [14:13]
2000 2-Feb-00 21-Mar-00 16-May-00 28-Jun-00 22-Aug-00 3-Oct-00 15-Nov-00 19-Dec-00
[14:14] [14:15] [14:13] [14:15] [14:14] [14:12] [14:12] [14:16]
2001 31-Jan-01 20-Mar-01 15-May-01 27-Jun-01 21-Aug-01 2-Oct-01 6-Nov-01 11-Dec-01
[14:15] [14:13] [14:15] [14:12] [14:13] [14:15] [14:20] [14:14]
2002 30-Jan-02 19-Mar-02 7-May-02 26-Jun-02 13-Aug-02 24-Sep-02 6-Nov-02 10-Dec-02
[14:16] [14:19] [14:14] [14:13] [14:14] [14:12] [14:14] [14:13]
2003 29-Jan-03 18-Mar-03 6-May-03 25-Jun-03 12-Aug-03 16-Sep-03 28-Oct-03 9-Dec-03
[14:16] [14:15] [14:13] [14:16] [14:15] [14:19] [14:14] [14:14]
2004 28-Jan-04 16-Mar-04 4-May-04 30-Jun-04 10-Aug-04 21-Sep-04 10-Nov-04 14-Dec-04
[14:14] [14:15] [14:16] [14:18] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15]
2005 2-Feb-05 22-Mar-05 3-May-05 30-Jun-05 9-Aug-05 20-Sep-05 1-Nov-05 13-Dec-05
[14:17] [14:17] [14:16] [14:15] [14:17] [14:17] [14:18] [14:13]
2006 31-Jan-06 28-Mar-06 10-May-06 29-Jun-06 8-Aug-06 20-Sep-06 25-Oct-06 12-Dec-06
[14:14] [14:17] [14:17] [14:16] [14:14] [14:13] [14:13] [14:14]
2007 31-Jan-07 21-Mar-07 9-May-07 28-Jun-07 7-Aug-07 18-Sep-07 31-Oct-07 11-Dec-07
[14:14] [14:15] [14:15] [14:14] [14:14] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15]
2008 30-Jan-08 18-Mar-08 30-Apr-08 25-Jun-08 5-Aug-08 16-Sep-08 29-Oct-08 16-Dec-08
[14:14] [14:14] [14:15] [14:19] [14:13] [14:14] [14:17] [14:11]
2009 28-Jan-09 18-Mar-09 29-Apr-09 24-Jun-09 12-Aug-09 23-Sep-09 4-Nov-09 16-Dec-09
[14:14] [14:17] [14:16] [14:18] [14:16] [14:16] [14:18] [14:15]
2010 27-Jan-10 16-Mar-10 28-Apr-10 23-Jun-10 10-Aug-10 21-Sep-10 3-Nov-10 14-Dec-10
[14:17] [14:14] [14:14] [14:16] [14:15] [14:15] [14:16] [14:15]
2011 26-Jan-11 15-Mar-11
[14:16] [14:13]
Notes: This table reports dates of scheduled FOMC meetings. The marker “ e” denotes meetings that
are excluded from our sample. The time of the announcements, reported in square brackets, from 1994 to
2004 are from Fleming and Piazzesi [2005] and are based on the time-stamp of Bloomberg or Dow Jones
newswires. We update this list for the remaining sample using the same method.
58
=== PAGE 60 ===
T able A.2: Summary Statistics in 1980 sample: SP500 excess returns
All Observations Excl. top/bottom 1
FOMC nonFOMC FOMC nonFOMC
Mean .366 .011 .34 .018
[.07] [.01] [.06] [.01]
St. Dev. 1.12 1.12 .9 .9
Skew 2.31 -1.34 .37 -.11
Kurtosis 20.7 36.87 4.19 3.63
Max 9.53 12.06 3.54 2.77
Min -2.93 -22.91 -2.18 -2.97
Obs. 244 7598 240 7448
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the daily log
excess returns on the SPX on FOMC days and non-FOMC days.
Standard errors for the mean reported in square brackets. The
sample period is Jan 2, 1980 to Mar 31, 2011.
=== PAGE 61 ===
T able A.3: CRSP Value-Weighted Industry Portfolio Regressions: 1994-2011
Dependent V ariable: %log-excess-return of CRSP Industry portfolio
Industry Portfolio: AGRIC FOOD SODA BEER SMOKE TOYS FUN
FOMC dummy 0 .24 0 .10 −0.14 0 .01 −0.07 0 .32 0 .50
[0.17] [0 .08] [0 .22] [0 .09] [0 .15] [0 .12]∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .39 0 .38 −0.10 0 .09 −0.06 0 .61 0 .66
Industry Portfolio: BOOKS HSHLD CLTHS HLTH MEDEQ DRUGS CHEMS
FOMC dummy 0 .37 0 .23 0 .38 0 .24 0 .19 0 .25 0 .44
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.09]∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗ [0.10]∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .73 0 .67 0 .77 0 .57 0 .54 0 .72 0 .98
Industry Portfolio: RUBBR TXTLS BLDMT CNSTR STEEL FABPR MACH
FOMC dummy 0 .39 0 .51 0 .38 0 .44 0 .50 0 .51 0 .49
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.16]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.18]∗∗ [0.16]∗∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .80 0 .77 0 .70 0 .63 0 .78 0 .63 0 .97
Industry Portfolio: ELCEQ AUTOS AERO SHIPS GUNS GOLD MINES
FOMC dummy 0 .53 0 .51 0 .45 0 .25 0 .13 0 .26 0 .56
[0.14]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗∗∗ [0.15]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗ [0.13] [0 .22] [0 .16]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .98 0 .86 0 .79 0 .49 0 .29 0 .28 0 .89
Industry Portfolio: COAL OIL UTIL TELCM PERSV BUSSV HARDW
FOMC dummy 0 .40 0 .29 0 .10 0 .13 0 .42 0 .37 0 .40
[0.27] [0 .12]∗∗ [0.09] [0 .12] [0 .13]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.17]∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .43 0 .67 0 .34 0 .28 0 .82 0 .93 0 .63
Industry Portfolio: SOFTW CHIPS LABEQ PAPER BOXES TRANS WHLSL
FOMC dummy 0 .48 0 .54 0 .44 0 .18 0 .27 0 .45 0 .30
[0.15]∗∗∗ [0.16]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗ [0.12]∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .80 0 .82 0 .83 0 .46 0 .57 0 .99 0 .76
Industry Portfolio: RTAIL MEALS BANKS INSUR RLEST FIN OTHER
FOMC dummy 0 .33 0 .27 0 .56 0 .42 0 .35 0 .70 0 .30
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗∗∗ [0.16]∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .74 0 .64 0 .72 0 .77 0 .53 0 .92 0 .61
Notes: This table provides results for FOMC dummy variable regressions for diﬀerent U.S. equity portfolios
for the sample period from Sep 1, 1994 through Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variables are the daily excess
returns on the 49 Industry portfolios provided on Ken French’s website. “FOMC dummy” denotes a variable that
takes on the value of one on days of scheduled FOMC announcements and 0 otherwise. “FOMC Sharpe Ratio”
is the annualized Sharpe-ratio on pre-FOMC returns.*** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at
10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
60
=== PAGE 62 ===
T able A.4: CRSP Value-Weighted Industry Portfolio Regressions: 1980-2011
Dependent V ariable: %log-excess-return of CRSP Industry portfolio
Industry Portfolio: AGRIC FOOD SODA BEER SMOKE TOYS FUN
FOMC dummy 0 .12 0 .14 −0.02 0 .08 0 .09 0 .25 0 .33
[0.10] [0 .06]∗∗ [0.13] [0 .08] [0 .10] [0 .09]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .26 0 .53 0 .02 0 .29 0 .24 0 .49 0 .55
Industry Portfolio: BOOKS HSHLD CLTHS HLTH MEDEQ DRUGS CHEMS
FOMC dummy 0 .27 0 .20 0 .28 0 .25 0 .17 0 .30 0 .30
[0.08]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .65 0 .60 0 .65 0 .62 0 .48 0 .82 0 .75
Industry Portfolio: RUBBR TXTLS BLDMT CNSTR STEEL FABPR MACH
FOMC dummy 0 .22 0 .37 0 .25 0 .28 0 .31 0 .40 0 .30
[0.08]∗∗∗ [0.09]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .53 0 .73 0 .58 0 .48 0 .58 0 .63 0 .69
Industry Portfolio: ELCEQ AUTOS AERO SHIPS GUNS GOLD MINES
FOMC dummy 0 .39 0 .35 0 .32 0 .21 0 .18 0 .29 0 .33
[0.09]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗ [0.09]∗∗ [0.15]∗ [0.10]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .81 0 .67 0 .66 0 .38 0 .39 0 .34 0 .59
Industry Portfolio: COAL OIL UTIL TELCM PERSV BUSSV HARDW
FOMC dummy 0 .33 0 .22 0 .11 0 .10 0 .26 0 .25 0 .30
[0.16]∗∗ [0.09]∗∗ [0.06]∗∗ [0.08] [0 .08]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .40 0 .51 0 .43 0 .28 0 .57 0 .72 0 .52
Industry Portfolio: SOFTW CHIPS LABEQ PAPER BOXES TRANS WHLSL
FOMC dummy 0 .33 0 .38 0 .30 0 .16 0 .23 0 .34 0 .24
[0.11]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .56 0 .71 0 .60 0 .47 0 .55 0 .80 0 .68
Industry Portfolio: RTAIL MEALS BANKS INSUR RLEST FIN OTHER
FOMC dummy 0 .24 0 .22 0 .32 0 .28 0 .15 0 .47 0 .25
[0.08]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.10] [0 .11]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .62 0 .60 0 .54 0 .63 0 .25 0 .80 0 .56
Notes: This table provides results for FOMC dummy variable regressions for diﬀerent U.S. equity portfolios
for the sample period from Jan 2, 1980 through Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variables are the daily excess
returns on the 49 Industry portfolios provided on Ken French’s website. “FOMC dummy” denotes a variable that
takes on the value of one on days of scheduled FOMC announcements and 0 otherwise. “FOMC Sharpe Ratio”
is the annualized Sharpe-ratio on pre-FOMC returns.*** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at
10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
61
=== PAGE 63 ===
T able A.5: CRSP Size Portfolio Regressions: 1994-2011
Dependent V ariable: %Log-excess-return of CRSP portfolio index
Portfolio: Value Weighted Equal Weighted 1st Decile 2nd Decile 3rd Decile 4th Decile
FOMC dummy 0 .35 0 .25 0 .20 0 .40 0 .42 0 .44
[0.10]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .01 0 .06 0 .02 0 .02 0 .02 0 .01
[0.02] [0 .02]∗∗∗ [0.02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02]
Annual ex-return FOMC 2 .90 2 .45 1 .79 3 .32 3 .47 3 .56
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 2 .34 14 .66 5 .77 3 .92 3 .69 2 .20
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .92 0 .93 0 .71 0 .86 0 .93 0 .98
Portfolio: 5th Decile 6th Decile 7th Decile 8th Decile 9th Decile 10th Decile
FOMC dummy 0 .46 0 .40 0 .39 0 .39 0 .37 0 .31
[0.11]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .01 0 .01 0 .02 0 .01 0 .02 0 .01
[0.02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02]
Annual ex-return FOMC 3 .73 3 .26 3 .26 3 .20 3 .10 2 .52
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 2 .61 3 .35 4 .23 3 .36 3 .66 1 .80
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 1 .06 1 .03 1 .05 0 .99 0 .98 0 .80
Notes: This table provides results for FOMC dummy variable regressions for diﬀerent U.S. equity portfolios for the sample
period from Sep 1, 1994 through Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variables are the daily excess returns on the value-weighted and
equally-weighted market portfolio from CRSP as well as the 10 size decile portfolios provided on Ken French’s website. “FOMC
dummy” denotes a variable that takes on the value of one on days of scheduled FOMC announcements and 0 otherwise. “Annual ex-
return FOMC” is the average cumulative annual excess return of FOMC day returns, and “Annual ex-return non-FOMC” denotes
the average cumulative annual excess return of non-FOMC day returns in the sample. “FOMC Sharpe Ratio” is the annualized
Sharpe-ratio on pre-FOMC returns.*** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown
in brackets.
62
=== PAGE 64 ===
T able A.6: CRSP Size Portfolio Regressions: 1980-2011
Dependent V ariable: %Log-excess-return of CRSP portfolio index
Portfolio: Value Weighted Equal Weighted 1st Decile 2nd Decile 3rd Decile 4th Decile
FOMC dummy 0 .27 0 .13 0 .10 0 .23 0 .26 0 .28
[0.07]∗∗∗ [0.05]∗∗ [0.05]∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .01 0 .06 0 .02 0 .02 0 .02 0 .02
[0.01] [0 .01]∗∗∗ [0.01]∗ [0.01] [0 .01] [0 .01]
Annual ex-return FOMC 2 .20 1 .48 0 .89 1 .89 2 .20 2 .28
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 3 .42 14 .56 4 .36 3 .79 4 .49 3 .68
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .78 0 .66 0 .41 0 .60 0 .72 0 .76
Portfolio: 5th Decile 6th Decile 7th Decile 8th Decile 9th Decile 10th Decile
FOMC dummy 0 .29 0 .26 0 .26 0 .27 0 .29 0 .26
[0.07]∗∗∗ [0.06]∗∗∗ [0.06]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .02 0 .02 0 .02 0 .02 0 .02 0 .01
[0.01] [0 .01] [0 .01]∗ [0.01] [0 .01] [0 .01]
Annual ex-return FOMC 2 .39 2 .21 2 .22 2 .24 2 .40 2 .15
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 4 .38 4 .80 5 .00 4 .53 4 .29 3 .05
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .81 0 .82 0 .83 0 .78 0 .84 0 .72
Notes: This table provides results for FOMC dummy variable regressions for diﬀerent U.S. equity portfolios for the sample
period from Jan 2, 1980 through Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variables are the daily excess returns on the value-weighted and
equally-weighted market portfolio from CRSP as well as the 10 size decile portfolios provided on Ken French’s website. “FOMC
dummy” denotes a variable that takes on the value of one on days of scheduled FOMC announcements and 0 otherwise. “Annual ex-
return FOMC” is the average cumulative annual excess return of FOMC day returns, and “Annual ex-return non-FOMC” denotes
the average cumulative annual excess return of non-FOMC day returns in the sample. “FOMC Sharpe Ratio” is the annualized
Sharpe-ratio on pre-FOMC returns.*** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown
in brackets.
63