
=== PAGE 1 ===
The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift
David O. Lucca and Emanuel Moench ∗
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
This draft: June 2012
(October 2012 revision)
Abstract
Since the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) began announcing its mone-
tary policy decisions in 1994, U.S. stocks experienced large excess returns in the 24
hours preceding these announcements. These abnormal returns account for more than
80% of the U.S. equity premium over the past 17 years. Other major international
equity indices experienced similar abnormal returns before FOMC announcements. In
contrast, no such return pattern is detectable on U.S. ﬁxed income assets or the ex-
change value of the dollar. We discuss a few possible explanations for the pre-FOMC
announcement drift for equities, none of which appears to be fully consistent with the
empirical evidence.
Keywords: FOMC announcements, equity premium, information choice
JEL classiﬁcation: G10, G12, G15
∗We would like to thank Tobias Adrian, Yakov Amihud, Nina Boyarchenko, John Cochrane, Richard
Crump, Itamar Drechsler, Darrell Duﬃe, Fernando Duarte, Thomas Eisenbach, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
Michael Fleming, Charles Jones, Thomas Mertens, Lubos Pastor, Simon Potter, Asani Sarkar, Ernst Schaum-
burg, Pietro Veronesi, Jonathan Wright and seminar participants at the New York Fed, NYU Stern Finance,
Deutsche Bundesbank, Banque de France, and the Swiss National Bank for useful comments, as well as Steve
Kang for research assistance. Emails: david.lucca@ny.frb.gov, emanuel.moench@ny.frb.gov. The views ex-
pressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect views at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
=== PAGE 2 ===
1 Introduction
This paper documents that stocks in the U.S. and several other major economies have expe-
rienced large abnormal returns right before U.S. monetary policy announcements since 1994.
These returns are puzzling and diﬃcult to explain with standard asset pricing models.
Members of the FOMC—the Federal Reserve’s (Fed) monetary policy-making body—convene
at pre-scheduled meetings eight times per year. The outcomes of these meetings have been
announced to the public at known times since 1994. We document that since then, the
S&P500 index has on average increased 49 basis points in the 24 hours prior to the FOMC
announcements. The abnormal returns do not revert in subsequent trading days and, more
generally, excess returns outside the 24-hour pre-FOMC window have on average been orders
of magnitude smaller. As a result, a staggering 80% of the annual U.S. equity premium since
1994 was earned in the 24 hours before FOMC announcements. A simple trading strategy
of holding the index only in the 24 hours leading up to an FOMC announcement yields an
annualized Sharpe ratio of above 1.1. Other major foreign stock markets exhibited similar
abnormal returns, and the 24-hour pre-FOMC returns have accounted for a large fraction of
these markets’ equity premia as well.
We show that the abnormal returns are not explained by outliers and are not the result
of data-snooping. Based on one-year rolling averages, we ﬁnd the pre-FOMC drift to be
positive for the vast majority of the sample period. In terms of time-series variation, returns
are somewhat countercyclical and, using economic survey data, we show that they are higher
when monetary easing is expected and when forecasters disagree less about future Fed policy.
The pre-FOMC returns are broad-based across U.S. industry and size portfolios. A single
market factor model captures a signiﬁcant fraction of the cross-sectional variation of these
returns. Fixed income assets and currencies have not featured analogous abnormal pre-
FOMC returns, and other major U.S. macroeconomic news announcements do not give rise
to analogous pre-announcement returns in the post-1994 sample.
What explains these ﬁndings? First, price jumps, shown to command risk premia (Pan
[2002]), are an unlikely source of the price drift as the pre-FOMC return accrues prior to
the announcement when investors are not exposed to the jumps at the announcement. In
terms of realized monetary policy, the federal funds rate has trended lower over the sample
period, reaching historically low levels at the end of the sample. In addition, interest rate
policy has sometimes been characterized as having an asymmetric impact on riskier asset
values through implicit ﬂoors, or so called “government puts” (for example, Diamond and
Rajan [2011]). If these were the true sources of the drift, however, it is not clear why
1
=== PAGE 3 ===
they would have impacted stock prices only right ahead of the meetings, rather than on
all days in the sample. Indeed, while FOMC members regularly discuss monetary policy in
speeches and interviews, they refrain from any such discussion ahead of policy meetings (a
time interval known as thepurdah period). We consistently ﬁnd measures of equity volatility
and liquidity to be somewhat lower in the hours before FOMC announcements relative to
other days. Previous work ﬁnds that lower liquidity and volatility is associated with higher
excess returns (Campbell and Hentschel [1992], Amihud [2002]). However, the magnitude
of these declines is too small to account for the size of the pre-FOMC return in the data.
Furthermore, the source of these movements would still need to be explained. Similarly, one
would still need to identify the source of a contemporaneous shift in risk aversion that may
rationalize the price drift within a consumption-based pricing kernel.
We consider several alternative models that can lead to price drifts ahead of scheduled
announcements featuring, in particular, political risk (Pastor and Veronesi [2011]), rationally
inattentive investors (Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp [2009]), and limited stock
market participation (Duﬃe [2010]). Although these models can qualitatively match the
price drift ahead of the announcements, they are at odds with other features of the data,
such as liquidity, return volatility and the persistence of the pre-FOMC return.
In addition to the work cited thus far, this paper is related to diﬀerent strands of the lit-
erature. A vast literature has tried to explain the equity premium puzzle (see for example
Campbell [2003] for a review). Our paper documents that since 1994 the bulk of the eq-
uity premium can be accounted for by returns in the 24 hours preceding scheduled FOMC
announcements, a ﬁnding that may help shed light on alternative theories. A large litera-
ture has also studied asset price responses to monetary policy rate decisions (e.g. Kuttner
[2001]).1 For U.S. equities, Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] document large stock market re-
sponses to unexpected federal funds rate shocks. We see our results as complementary to
these studies as we document the existence of an unconditional excess return that is earned
ahead of the FOMC announcement. These returns are thus likely driven by an anticipa-
tion rather than the realization of policy decisions. A related literature has documented a
sizeable conditional response of various asset classes to other economic news announcements
(Jones, Lamont, and Lumsdaine [1998], Fleming and Remolona [1999], Andersen, Boller-
slev, Diebold, and Vega [2003]). The existence of returns ahead of scheduled announcements
question, to some extent, the exclusive focus on asset price responses to announcements, as
sizeable unconditional eﬀects may also be present. More recently, Savor and Wilson [2010]
ﬁnd positive excess equity returns on days of scheduled macroeconomic data releases, in-
1A more recent literature has also focused on ﬁnancial asset responses to communication about future,
rather than actual realization, of monetary policy actions (G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson [2005], Lucca and
Trebbi [2009])
2
=== PAGE 4 ===
cluding FOMC announcements, from 1958 through 2009. Our results suggest that at least
since 1994, these returns are only associated with FOMC announcements, and most impor-
tantly that the returns are not earned when the announcements are realized, for example
as a reward for jump risk, but rather before. Lamont and Frazzini [2007] have recently
documented a qualitatively similar upward drift of individual stock prices prior to scheduled
earnings announcements. While these authors focus on a behavioral “attention grabbing”
eﬀect as a potential explanation, we mainly consider theories based on rational expectations.
Nonetheless we stress in the paper that, due to the absence of new fundamental public in-
formation ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements, informational frictions may play an
important role in explaining the drift. Recently, for example, Tetlock [2011] shows that stale
news can aﬀect stock prices. We discuss additional relevant literature along the way.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief discussion of
the monetary policy decision process in the U.S. and reviews the data used in this paper.
In Section 3, we present the main empirical ﬁndings. Section 4 discusses a list of potential
explanations for our ﬁndings, and Section 5 concludes.
2 FOMC meetings and Data
2.1 FOMC meetings
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, or Committee) is the monetary policy-making
body of the U.S. Federal Reserve System. The FOMC makes policy decisions— setting the
target for the federal funds rate, and since 2008, large-scale asset purchases of Treasury and
agency securities—under the statutory dual mandate of maximum employment and stable
prices.2 Policy decisions are made under a majority rule at FOMC meetings, which are
scheduled to occur eight times per year (or about once every six weeks). These scheduled
meetings are the focus of this paper. A list of the meeting dates and times is reported in
Table 1. The FOMC can also meet at other times in unscheduled meetings. These meetings
have been rather infrequent and their occurrence is unknown to investors in advance. 3
2The Committee is composed of twelve members: the seven members of the Board of Governors and
ﬁve of the twelve Reserve Bank presidents. The Federal Reserve Board Chairman also serves as the FOMC
Chairman. With the exception of the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who is a permanent
voting member and FOMC vice-Chair, presidents of all other Banks take voting positions on a rotating basis
that last one year.
3Unscheduled meetings typically occur via teleconference and are known to investors right-after the
meeting only when a target rate change occurs. Since 1994, such meetings have occurred on the following
dates: April 18, 1994, October 15, 1998, January 3, 2001, September 17, 2001, January 21, 2008, October 7,
2008. In addition intermeeting statements related to “liquidity facilities” were released on: August 10/16,
3
=== PAGE 5 ===
Prior to 1994, the FOMC did not disclose its policy decisions and market participants gen-
erally inferred the target federal funds rate from the size of open market operations on the
days following the FOMC meeting. Starting in February 1994 the FOMC began to announce
its decisions and accompanying statements (FOMC statements) after pre-scheduled meet-
ings only when a change to the current policy was made. Starting in May 1999, statements
have been released after every pre-scheduled meeting irrespective of whether a policy change
occurred or not. From September 1994 to March 2011, FOMC statements were regularly
released at, or a few minutes after, 2:15pm ET following each scheduled meeting. 4 Since
April 2011, the time of the release has been 12:30pm on days of FOMC meetings, after
which a press conference by the FOMC Chairman is held at 2:15pm. Our analysis focuses
on the sample from September 1994 through March 2011 over which FOMC releases have
consistently been made at, or within a few minutes of, 2:15pm, as reported in Table 1.
To enhance transparency in communicating its policy decisions over the past 20 years, mem-
bers of the FOMC have increasingly employed speeches, testimonies to Congress and other
means to communicate to market participants the likely path of monetary policy. While this
communication is today considered a key policy instrument in its own regard (e.g. Blinder,
Ehrmann, Fratzscher, Haan, and Jansen [2008]), importantly FOMC participants refrain
from any policy discussion in the week leading up to each FOMC meeting (the purdah
period, see Ehrmann and Fratzscher [2009]). Hence, no such information about the likely
outcome of the policy decision is released in the days before FOMC meetings. This is an
important fact to bear in mind when interpreting the evidence presented in this paper.
2.2 Data
Our analysis focuses on ﬁnancial asset returns around scheduled FOMC meetings between
September 1994 and March 2011. Most of the evidence is based on intraday data and focuses
on the 24-hour period from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement until
2pm on the day of a scheduled FOMC announcement, which is about ﬁfteen minutes before
the announcement release time. Hence, by construction, returns computed over this time
interval do not contain news about the upcoming monetary policy decisions and therefore
allow us to exclusively study anticipatory eﬀects associated with FOMC announcements.
2008 and May 9, 2010. Over the same sample period, 24 other unscheduled meetings took place without any
immediate release of a statement. These meetings were made public only with the release of the minutes of
the subsequent scheduled meeting (about one to two months after the original meeting took place).
4The only exception to this rule is the statement of March 26, 1996 which was released in the morning
because the Chairman was scheduled to testify in Congress later that day. The timing of the release was
pre-announced to investors.
4
=== PAGE 6 ===
Due to limited availability of intraday data some evidence in the remaining sections is based
on daily close-to-close returns as explicitly noted (for example, portfolio returns). We use
several data sources: Thomson Reuters TickHistory and Tickdata.com for intraday data,
Bloomberg data for dividend data, and daily returns on sorted U.S. stock portfolios from
Ken French’s website. We use information about professional forecasters’ federal funds rate
expectations from the BlueChip Financial Forecasts survey, and source data on the number
of articles published in the ﬁnancial press from Factiva. Table 2 provides summary statistics
on FOMC days and non-FOMC days for the main variables used in our empirical analysis.
Since most of our analysis refers to mean returns in these two subsamples, we omit a detailed
discussion here and instead refer interested readers to the Table.
3 Facts
In this section we present the empirical ﬁndings of the paper. We ﬁrst document large
excess returns on broad U.S. and international stock market indices, as well as U.S. industry
and size portfolios ahead of scheduled FOMC meetings. We then show the absence of such
returns on other asset classes around FOMC announcements, and on U.S. equity returns
around other major macroeconomic releases.
3.1 The pre-FOMC Announcement Drift in the S&P500
Figure 1 shows a striking pattern of U.S. stock returns around FOMC announcements. The
black solid line in the chart represents the mean point-wise cumulative intraday percent
return of the S&P500 index (SPX henceforth) over a three-day window from the market
open on the day ahead of scheduled FOMC meetings to the day after. The mean is taken
over the 131 scheduled FOMC meetings from September 1994 to March 2011. 5
As seen in the Figure, the SPX index displays a strong upward drift in the hours ahead of
FOMC announcements. First, the SPX index rises slightly on the afternoon of the day before
the FOMC (left panel). It then drifts sharply higher in the morning of scheduled FOMC
announcements. Right before the time of the announcement (vertical red dashed line) it
reaches a level about 50 basis points above that of the previous-day open. Following the an-
nouncement at 2:15pm the SPX is on average about ﬂat, both in the hours immediately after
the announcement and on the following day (right panel). As evidenced by the point-wise
5Relative to the dates reported in Table 1 we lose one observation (Jul 1, 1998) because of missing intraday
data. The close-to-close return on that day was 1.3 percent.
5
=== PAGE 7 ===
95% conﬁdence interval for the mean return (light grey area), the cumulative return earned
prior to scheduled FOMC announcements is strongly signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
To put the economic magnitude of this pre-FOMC drift in perspective, the dashed black
line in Figure 1 shows the average cumulative returns on all other three-day windows in
the sample excluding day triplets centered around FOMC announcements, along with the
point-wise 95% conﬁdence bands (dark gray shaded area). 6 On average cumulative returns
on these days have essentially been zero over our sample period.
The mean intraday returns in the chart do not include dividend payments, and are not
premium measures because they do not account for the level of the risk-free rate. To account
for these and assess the magnitudes of the returns more formally we run the simple dummy-
variable regression model:
rxt =β0 +β11t(FOMC ) +βxXt +ϵt, (1)
where rxt denotes the cum-dividend log excess return on the SPX over the risk-free rate in
percentage points.7 In the main speciﬁcation, the explanatory variable is a dummy variable,
which is equal to one on scheduled FOMC announcement dates and zero otherwise. In
alternative speciﬁcations in Section 4 we include explanatory variables Xt.
In the regression excluding other controlsXt, the coeﬃcientβ1 is the mean return on FOMC
days when the constantβ0 is omitted, and the mean excess return diﬀerential on FOMC days
versus other days when the constant is present. The constant measures the unconditional
mean excess return earned on non-FOMC announcement days.
Table 3 reports coeﬃcient estimates for these two parameters over diﬀerent return windows
and time samples. The dependent variable in the ﬁrst two columns is the 2pm-to-2pm
SPX excess return. By construction, this 24-hour return ending on 2pm on the day of
scheduled FOMC announcements does not include any information regarding the realized
policy decision, which is yet to be announced. As seen in the ﬁrst column, for the 131 FOMC
observations in the sample, the 24-hour window return right before the FOMC meeting has
on average been 49 basis points, with a t-statistic of more than 4.5 based on the Huber-White
standard errors (squared brackets). As shown in the second column, this excess return of
less than one-half basis points has been orders of magnitude larger than the mean excess
return on all other 2pm-to-2pm windows in the sample.
6 These intervals account for the serial correlation due to the overlapping window structure of these
returns using Newey-West standard errors. Truncation lags are wider than the actual daily overlap because
of the kernel down-weighting: three-day window on the second day, and a ﬁve days window on the third day.
7We use as risk-free rate the daily rate on a one-month Tbill locked in the month before.
6
=== PAGE 8 ===
Yet, there are only eight scheduled FOMC meetings each year. To gauge the impact of this
return diﬀerence on the total equity premium in the sample, the middle panel of Table 3
presents annualized returns on FOMC and non-FOMC days. While the excess return on the
SPX over the 24 hours prior to the FOMC announcement has on average been 3.89 percent
per year, it has only been 0.89 percent on all remaining trading days. These point estimates
imply that since 1994 more than 80 percent of the U.S. equity premium has been earned in
the 24 hours before scheduled monetary policy announcements. The simple strategy that
consists in buying the SPX at 2pm the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement and
selling ﬁfteen minutes before the announcement while holding cash on all other days would
have earned a large annualized Sharpe ratio of 1.14 as reported in the Table.
Consistent with Figure 1, the excess SPX return between 2pm and market close on the day
of the announcement has instead been zero (column 3 in the Table). In other words, while
the SPX has displayed a large positive drift in the 24 hours leading up to the announcement,
stock returns have on average been zero at or following the announcement. This implies that
while equity market investors have at times been surprised by the FOMC decision (Bernanke
and Kuttner [2005]), these surprises averaged out to zero over our sample period.
Looking at the close-to-close excess returns on the SPX (column 4), which include the
afternoon following the announcement, rather than the afternoon before, the FOMC return
diﬀerential has been somewhat lower at about 33 basis points in the sample period. However,
the average close-to-close return on all other days is less than one basis point, and the
annualized FOMC day return on a close-to-close basis still accounts for more than half of
the annual equity premium (2.7 percent compared to 2.03 percent on all other days). The
close-to-close FOMC day return still remains highly signiﬁcant and yields a considerable
annualized Sharpe Ratio of 0.84 as reported in the Table.
As previously discussed our sample starts when the FOMC ﬁrst consistently released its
policy decisions right after the meeting at a known time. Indeed, before that time market
participants had to infer the likely policy action through open market operations in the days
following the FOMC meeting. If the drift were related to anticipations about the actual
policy action at the meeting, rather than a simple calendar eﬀect, we would thus expect the
drift to be much less pronounced before 1994.
In the last column of Table 3 we run the dummy variable regression on the sample 1970-
1993, for a total of 236 FOMC announcement days. 8 While we ﬁnd evidence of a positive
8Following Kuttner [2001], we assume that FOMC decisions became public one day after its meeting prior
to 1994, which is typically when the ﬁrst open market operation following each meeting was conducted. In
other words, over this sample the dummy variable takes on the value of one the day after scheduled FOMC
meetings and zero on all other days.
7
=== PAGE 9 ===
diﬀerential excess return on FOMC announcement days compared to other days, it is tiny
in magnitude (about 5 basis points) and not statistically diﬀerent from zero. Consequently
the decomposition of the annual excess return is much less tilted towards FOMC days, and
the Sharpe ratio of an FOMC-only investment strategy is 0.2 in this sample.
Given the large magnitude of the pre-FOMC drift, one might be concerned that a few outlier
observations may be driving the results. Table 4 provides summary statistics of the 2pm-
to-2pm return on the SPX on FOMC days versus all other days in the post-1994 sample.
The mean excess return and its standard error (ﬁrst two rows) are the same as in Table 3.
The standard deviation of excess returns is 1.2 per cent both on FOMC days and on other
days, implying that, in terms of variance, stocks are not more risky on FOMC days (we
discuss the relation between volatility and returns in Section 4). The skewness of the two
return distributions, however, displays a notable diﬀerence. While equity returns exhibit a
strong positive skew ahead of FOMC announcements, they are slightly negatively skewed on
all other days. Indeed, 98 of the 131 pre-FOMC announcement returns are positive in our
sample—or three quarters of the total—but only 33 are negative (not reported in the table).
Instead, positive and negative excess returns are roughly equally split on non-FOMC days
in the sample.
The distributional diﬀerences in the empirical densities are shown in Figure 2. The 2pm-2pm
FOMC return density (black line) is similar to that on non-FOMC days (grey), but impor-
tantly omits a left tail, with most of the corresponding density mass instead concentrated in
positive returns. While at this point it is clear that outliers do not dominate the results we
have seen so far, Table 4 shows that the kurtosis of pre-FOMC returns is slightly higher than
on regular days suggesting a somewhat more fat-tailed distribution on FOMC days. As a
ﬁnal check we thus drop the top and bottom percentile and compare the resulting moments
of the FOMC and non-FOMC day distributions (last two columsn in Table 4). 9 None of the
summary measures are qualitatively aﬀected when we exclude outliers. Dropping the top
and bottom 1% of all observations, the mean pre-FOMC announcement return is still very
large at 45 basis points while the mean return on all other days is 1 basis point (as evidenced
in the second row, the statistical signiﬁcance increases). The standard deviation of returns
remains very similar in both samples. While the skewness of pre-FOMC announcement re-
turns somewhat falls without the tail observations, it is still positive while that on all other
days remains negative. Finally, the kurtosis is now similar in both trimmed samples.
9The top and bottom 1% of pre-FOMC returns amount to only two observations. The largest positive
outlier is a 9.5% return on October 29, 2008. News reports on that day partly attributed the surge in
equity prices to speculation that the FOMC may cut interest rates the next day. Moreover, talk of a federal
rescue for General Motors and Chrysler also may have contributed to the price action. The largest negative
outlier is a -2.9 % return on June 26, 2002, driven mainly by news of an accounting fraud at phone company
WorldCom.
8
=== PAGE 10 ===
As noted above about three quarters of the pre-FOMC return observations have been posi-
tive. Have all these observations been clustered together in the 17 year long sample period
that we study? Figure 3 shows the time series of 2pm-2pm pre-FOMC announcement re-
turns (thin red line) along with the one-year moving average of these returns (black line)
and on non-FOMC days (grey line). 10 As seen from the red line positive and negative re-
turns on FOMC days have been rather equally distributed in the sample period. One-year
average returns remained positive for very long periods of time, and turned negative only in
two brief periods in 2002 and 2010. We will study possible determinants of the pre-FOMC
returns in Section 4.2.1. Before doing so, we turn brieﬂy to the pre-FOMC return pattern
on sorted equity portfolios, foreign equities and on SPX index returns around other major
macroeconomic announcements.
3.2 Cross-sectional Evidence
This section shows that U.S equity excess returns around FOMC announcements have been
broad based across industry- and size-sorted portfolios. We also characterize the cross-section
of these returns and show that a single market factor model captures a signiﬁcant fraction
of the portfolio variation on FOMC announcement days. Because of limited availability
of intra-day data at the disaggregated level, this evidence is based on daily close-to-close
returns.
Table 5 summarizes results of the dummy variable regression (1) including a constant, a
FOMC dummy for excess returns on the CRSP value/equal weighted, and ten value weighted
portfolios sorted by ﬁrm size. Not surprisingly, the return pattern for the value-weighted
portfolio (column 1) is very similar to that for the close-to-close return on the S&P500
index (Table 3). Indeed, the return diﬀerential has been a highly signiﬁcant 36 basis points,
FOMC announcement days have accounted for the majority of the annual equity premium
in the sample, and the Sharpe ratio of an FOMC-only investment strategy has been equal
to 0.92.
The daily excess return diﬀerential on the CRSP equal weighted market portfolio (column
2) on FOMC days has been somewhat smaller at 25 basis points, but still highly statisti-
cally signiﬁcant. Since the equal weighted portfolio attributes a large weight to small ﬁrms
relative to their share of total market capitalization, this ﬁnding suggests the FOMC return
diﬀerential may be somewhat lower for small ﬁrms. This conjecture is conﬁrmed by the
results for the size decile portfolios shown in the remaining columns of Table 5. Indeed, the
10The large right-tailed observation (October 29, 2008) that we exclude in Table 4 is excluded from the
pre-FOMC moving average and marked with an “X”.
9
=== PAGE 11 ===
portfolio containing the smallest ﬁrms earned an average excess return of 20 basis points on
FOMC announcement days.11 All remaining decile portfolios, instead, displayed diﬀerential
returns ranging between 31 to 46 basis points, with Sharpe ratios between 0.8 to 1.07.
Table 6 provides estimates for the dummy variable regressions for the 49 industry sorted port-
folios from Ken French’s website. While there is some cross-sectional dispersion of FOMC
announcement day returns across industries, the excess return diﬀerential is broad-based.
Indeed, 36 out of 49 industry portfolios feature excess returns on FOMC announcement days
that are statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at least at the 5 percent level. Among
these, the dummy variable coeﬃcients range from 23 basis points for the consumer goods
industry (HSHLD) to 69 basis points for trading ﬁrms (FIN). A group of only ten industries
as diverse as Agriculture (AGRIC), Food products (FOOD), Utilities (UTIL), and Telecom-
munication (TELCM) do not feature statistically signiﬁcant excess returns on scheduled
FOMC announcement days.
It is natural to ask whether the average FOMC announcement day returns in diﬀerent
industries are in line with their typical comovement with the market portfolio, as would be
implied by the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). To answer this question, we estimate
industry betas from a regression of the excess return in each industry on the excess return
of the CRSP value-weighted market portfolios. 12 We then estimate a regression of average
excess returns on the 59 industry and size portfolios on the estimated betas. Figure 4 shows
a scatter plot of observed average FOMC announcement day returns against the ﬁtted values
from this regression. We superimpose the estimated regression line (dashed) as well as the
45 degree line (solid). The chart shows that the single market factor model provides a fairly
good description of the cross-section of FOMC announcement day returns. Indeed, the slope
coeﬃcient λ, which represents the price of market risk, is estimated to be 49 basis points
and highly statistically signiﬁcant. By contrast, the constant α in the regression is not
statistically diﬀerent from zero. Moreover, the adjusted R-squared of the CAPM regression
on FOMC announcement days is 64 percent. In sharp contrast to the poor ﬁt of the CAPM
on all daily returns (Fama and French [1993]), these results suggest that the observed cross-
sectional variation of FOMC announcement day returns is well captured by exposure to
aggregate market risk. 13
11This smallest market cap portfolio contains on average about 50 percent of all ﬁrms in the CRSP universe.
12We run this regression using daily data including FOMC announcement days. Dropping these days from
the sample barely aﬀects the β estimates.
13At announcement, Bernanke and Kuttner [2005] also ﬁnd that the CAPM does a good job at explaining
the cross-sectional variation of the response of diﬀerent industry portfolio returns to monetary policy shocks.
10
=== PAGE 12 ===
3.3 International Evidence
Previous research has documented ample evidence of international stock return comovement
(e.g. Karolyi and Stulz [1996], Forbes and Rigobon [2002], and Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang
[2009]). This evidence suggests that international equity indices may also feature an FOMC
equity return diﬀerential.
To assess this question, we ﬁrst reestimate model (1) with a constant and a FOMC dummy
on daily close-to-close excess returns of major OECD stock indices. The results of these
regressions are documented in Table 7. The ﬁrst ﬁve columns report estimates based on
excess returns on the German DAX, the British FTSE 100, the French CAC40, the Spanish
IBEX, as well as the Swiss SMI. Importantly, because of the time oﬀset the close-to-close
returns on these European stock indices never include scheduled FOMC announcements and
thus provide estimates of pre-FOMC announcement returns. The FOMC dummy variables
in all ﬁve countries are highly statistically signiﬁcant and economically large, with estimates
ranging from 29 basis points in Switzerland to 53 basis points in France. In all ﬁve countries
the share of the equity premium earned on FOMC announcement days has been substantial
since 1994, and the Sharpe ratios of an FOMC only investment strategy range between 0.75
and 1.07. Results for the Canadian TSX index and the Japanese NIKKEI 225 are reported in
the last two columns of Table 7. The TSX shows a statistically signiﬁcant albeit lower FOMC
announcement day return than the European indices. 14 Interestingly, the NIKKEI index is
the only major stock market index that does not feature a signiﬁcant FOMC announcement
day return.
Figure 5 visualizes these results. It displays cumulative returns over the trading hours of
the respective exchange on the international stock indices on three days around scheduled
FOMC announcements, and the SPX cumulative return is superimposed for reference (it
is the same as in Figure 1). The international pattern of intraday stock returns is very
similar to that in the U.S. In other words, the large pre-FOMC return appears to be a
global phenomenon. In unreported results, we also investigated whether European, UK
and Japan stock indices feature similar return patterns around its corresponding central
bank’s monetary policy announcement days, but we failed to ﬁnd such eﬀects. While a
global phenomenon, the pre-announcement return is thus speciﬁc to U.S. monetary policy
decisions. In the next section, we show that this eﬀect is also absent for other major U.S.
macroeconomic announcements.
14Note that the TSX is computed from close prices taken after the FOMC announcement and therefore
potentially contains both a pre-announcement and a post-announcement component.
11
=== PAGE 13 ===
3.4 Other Macroeconomic Announcements and Other Assets
In this Section, we ﬁrst document that the SPX does not feature abnormal excess returns
around other major macroeconomic announcements. We then show that ﬁxed income assets
and major currencies do not exhibit abnormal pre-FOMC announcement returns.
We consider a set of nine major economic releases: weekly initial claims for unemployment in-
surance (INCLM) released by the U.S. Department of Labor, the advance GDP (GDPADV)
estimate released quarterly by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), the monthly In-
stitute for Supply Management’s (ISM) manufacturing index, Industrial Production (IP)
released monthly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Housing Starts (HS)
published monthly by the Census Bureau as well as Personal Income (PI) released monthly
by the BEA. Except for IP, which is released at 9:15 am ET, and the ISM, which is released
at 10:00 am ET, all these data releases occur at 8:30 am ET. To parse out both the pre-
announcement and announcement eﬀects, we run two regressions for each release: one where
the dummy variable equals one on the release date (announcement eﬀect), and one where
the event dummy equals one on the day prior to the release (pre-announcement eﬀect).
As shown in Table 8, only the ISM release features a signiﬁcant announcement day excess
return of 23 basis points over our sample period. All other macroeconomic releases do
not feature statistically signiﬁcant pre-announcement or post-announcement returns in our
sample.
In a recent paper, Savor and Wilson [2010] use a joint sample of FOMC, employment, and
inﬂation releases in the 1958-2009 sample, and ﬁnd a diﬀerential average excess return of
the CRSP value-weighted market return of about 10 basis points on these announcement
days. The return they consider is close-to-close, and the authors rationalize their result
with jump-risk at the announcement. The results for our shorter sample suggest that the
macroeconomic announcement returns tare driven by the pre-FOMC announcement drift.
As we discuss in detail in Section 4.1.1, because of their timing these returns cannot be
rationalized with jump risk.
We next study the pre-FOMC announcement returns on other asset classes. We focus on
securities known to be responsive to monetary policy decisions: short-term rate derivatives,
2- and 10-year Treasury yields, and the exchange rate value of the U.S. dollar against the Yen
and Euro. 15 The short-term rate derivatives that we consider are standard market implied
measures of policy rate expectations: the ﬁrst and second fed funds futures contracts, which
15See Kuttner [2001] and Bernanke and Kuttner [2005], for asset responses to policy rate decisions, and
G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson [2005] and Lucca and Trebbi [2009] for responses to the content of the
statements. Note that we use the DM/USD exchange rate prior to January 1999.
12
=== PAGE 14 ===
measure policy expectations one- and two-months out. Because the liquidity of fed funds
futures drops at longer horizons, we use eurodollar futures for expectations one-year out (4th
quarterly contract). Table 9 provides dummy variable regression results for these securities.
As none of the coeﬃcients is statistically signiﬁcant, it clearly shows that the pre-FOMC
announcement drift is speciﬁc to equities. We now turn to potential explanations of the
empirical ﬁndings documented thus far.
4 Discussion
In this section, we attempt to rationalize the pre-FOMC drift with a few alternative expla-
nations. We start by testing the robustness of our ﬁndings to possible data-snooping. We
then turn to a few standard risk-based explanations, and ﬁnally attempt to reconcile our
ﬁndings with models of political risk, investor inattention, and time varying stock market
participation.
4.1 Data-Snooping and Statistical Signiﬁcance
As discussed in Section 3, we ﬁnd the pre-FOMC return to be highly statistically signiﬁcant.
We have also seen that the SPX does not display excess returns ahead of other major U.S.
macroeconomic announcements. A skeptical reader may worry that the signiﬁcance of our
ﬁnding (and thus the Sharpe-ratios) could be the artiﬁcial outcome of an extensive search
across the universe of economic news announcements for the highest t-statistic. Of course,
such a search would not bias the size of the return.
We address this concern by carrying out a reality check in the spirit of White [2000]. In
particular, we simulate the snooping bias by resampling the pre-FOMC return series and
collecting the largest t-statistic among the ten economic announcements considered in Table
8 (including the FOMC) for each replication. 16 We ﬁnd that 99.9 percent of the bootstrap
distribution of maximum robust t-statistics are smaller than the value of 4.48 (Table 3,
column 3). In other words, the statistical signiﬁcance of our ﬁnding is extremely unlikely to
be the result of a data-snooping exercise.
16More in detail, we use the block-bootstrap procedure of Politis and Romano [1994] with a smoothing
parameter of q =.5 to generate 10,000 bootstrap samples of the 2pm-to-2pm excess return on the SPX. For
each sampled return series, we loop over the list of ten dummy variables and record the maximum robust
t-statistic from each regression in the sample.
13
=== PAGE 15 ===
4.1.1 Standard Risk Explanations: Consumption, Jumps, Volatility and Liq-
uidity
Recent speciﬁcations of the canonical consumption-based asset pricing model, for example
featuring habit preferences (Campbell and Cochrane [1999]) or long-run risks (Bansal and
Yaron [2004]) have been shown to be consistent with the magnitude of U.S. equity risk
premium in the post-war period. In consumption based models, investors demand compen-
sation for holding assets whose payoﬀs are positively correlated with their marginal utility of
consumption. While, of course, it is hard to measure consumption at intraday frequencies,
it seems unlikely that its covariance with stock returns would be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in
the 24-hour window ahead of FOMC announcements. While this leaves the door open for
potential shifts in risk aversion over the 24-hour windows, as a source of the change in the
covariance, such shifts would still require an explanation. We next turn to jump risk.
Financial asset prices may jump in response to large unexpected realizations of economic
news announcements. As the direction of the surprise is not predetermined, holding ﬁnancial
assets around economic announcements is a risk that investors need to be compensated for.
Previous research has found that this risk is priced in equities (e.g., Pan [2002]). Figure 6
plots the ﬁve-minute moving sums of squared tick-by-tick returns on the SPX in the three-day
window around the FOMC announcement. As one may suspect, realized volatility jumps at
2:15pm on scheduled FOMC days. Yet, as we documented above, the FOMC announcement
return is earned before the actual release. Because of the timing diﬀerence, it is therefore
diﬃcult to reconcile the pre-FOMC drift with pure jump risk at the announcement. That
being said, we will discuss alternative models below in which informational frictions or limited
market participation can give rise to smooth asset price adjustments in anticipation of events
that represent jump risks.
We turn next to volatility and liquidity risk. First we note from Figure 6 that realized
volatility is somewhat lower ahead of the FOMC announcement, and, as discussed below,
the same holds for implied volatility (as measured by the VIX). Starting with Black [1976],
a number of papers have shown a negative contemporaneous correlation between volatility
and returns. Campbell and Hentschel [1992], in particular, discuss a “volatility feedback
eﬀect” where causality runs from volatility to returns. In that explanation, because of
its persistence, an unexpected decline in volatility leads to a downward revision of future
expected volatility, and thus to lower risk.
A large literature has also documented a negative correlation between equity returns and
trading liquidity (Amihud and Mendelson [1986], Campbell, Grossman, and Wang [1993],
Pastor and Stambaugh [2003] and Acharya and Pedersen [2005] among others). While most
14
=== PAGE 16 ===
of the literature focuses on the cross-section of returns, a few papers have also studied the
impact of liquidity on market-wide returns. 17
While we do not observe trades or bid-ask spreads for all SPX constituents on an intraday
basis, we proxy liquidity measures for the cash-index basket with measures on tick-by-tick
trades and quotes on the SP500 E-mini futures, which started trading in 1997, and the
SPDR S&P500 exchange-traded fund (SPY, available to us since 1996). Both track the SPX
very closely and exhibit almost identical pre-FOMC announcement returns as the cash index
itself.
Figure 7 shows ﬁve minute average trading volumes on the most traded (either ﬁrst- or
next-to-front) E-mini SP500 futures contract over the same three-day window as above.
Because trading volume has a low-frequency trend in our sample period, we display volume
levels relative to their prior 21-day mean. For comparison, we also superimpose intraday
average relative volumes on non-FOMC days. Trading volumes on the day prior to an
FOMC announcement follow the typical U-shaped pattern on other days. Not surprisingly,
on scheduled FOMC days volumes spike at the time of the FOMC announcement. Earlier
in the day, trading volumes slowly decline from the high opening levels, as on other days,
but bottom out at lower levels.
In sum, volatility and liquidity are both lower in the pre-FOMC drift time window. This
is consistent with the fact that no new FOMC information is consistently being released
during the purdah period. We assess whether the reduction in these two factors can explain
the pre-FOMC return using the simple reduced form regression model (1) and including
volatility and liquidity proxies as controlsXt. For volatility, we ﬁrst obtain its expected and
unexpected components with time series regressions of 2pm levels on their lags (i.e. the prior
day 2pm level) as well as an FOMC announcement day dummy:
∆VIX t = 0.41[0.07] + 0.98[0.03]VIX t−1 − 0.28[0.16]1t(FOMC ) (2)
The estimated residual in this regression is a measure of volatility surprises that accounts for
the predictably lower level of the VIX on scheduled FOMC days, which has previously been
discussed for example by Chuli, Martens, and van Dijk [2010]. We use this innovation as an
additional control variable in regression (1) along with the lagged (2pm) level of the VIX.
As liquidity proxies we construct a daily series of bid-ask spreads at 2pm, relative trading
17 Amihud [2002], for instance, constructs an simple measure of illiquidity and documents a positive rela-
tionship between illiquidity and future excess returns, and a negative relationship between contemporaneous
unexpected illiquidity and excess returns in U.S. equities. He rationalizes the latter result with the notion
that higher realized illiquidity increases expected illiquidity which in turn raises expected stock returns and
lowers contemporaneous stock prices.
15
=== PAGE 17 ===
volume in the 2pm-2pm time interval, and Amihud’s illiquidity measure over the same time
window (the absolute return from 2pm-2pm divided by the dollar volume traded over the
previous 24 hours).
Regression estimates are shown in Table 10 where the liquidity measures are deﬁned on the
SPY (left-most columns) from January 1996 through March 2011 and the E-mini futures
(right-most columns) from September 1997 through March 2011. Because of the slightly
shorter samples we ﬁrst re-estimate the FOMC-only regression, which is the same as in
Table 3. Over the shorter samples the pre-FOMC drift is 55 basis points for the SPY and
54 basis points for the E-mini with t-statistics above 5. When we include the liquidity and
volatility measures (columns 2 and 4) the coeﬃcients on the dummy variables are essentially
unchanged in magnitude while their signiﬁcance increases notably. In terms of the other
controls, the liquidity measures only partially contribute to explaining the returns, while the
VIX innovation is statistically signiﬁcant and of the expected negative sign. 18 In sum, the
regression results imply that the lower liquidity and volatility ahead of the announcement
cannot quantitatively account for the pre-FOMC drift.
4.2 Non-standard explanations
In the previous section, we found it hard to rationalize the pre-FOMC announcement re-
turn with standard risk-based explanations. In this section, we consider possible other,
non-standard, explanations. Where these theories give rise to predictions that are testable
with the available data, we perform these tests. Before turning to this discussion, we at-
tempt to build some intuition by correlating the time-series of pre-FOMC returns with a few
explanatory variables.
4.2.1 The Time Series of Pre-FOMC Announcement Returns
As discussed in Section 3, while mostly positive, the 2pm-2pm pre-FOMC announcement
returns display signiﬁcant variation over time (thin red line in Figure 3). Here we aim to shed
some light on the potential sources of this time variation.19 As potential driving factors of the
size of the pre-FOMC drift, we consider business cycles, monetary policy cycles, and market
18Because the liquidity measures are correlated with one another, using them jointly in one regression may
mask the statistical signiﬁcance of liquidity due to possible collinearity. Nonetheless, controlling for multiple
liquidity measures represents a more powerful test of whether liquidity can explain the equity drift.
19For robustness, the large right-tailed observation (October 29, 2008) that we exclude in Table 4 and
marked with an “X” in Figure 3 is also omitted in the regression analysis in this section.
16
=== PAGE 18 ===
participants’ expectations of future Fed policy. Table 11 presents parameter estimates for
equation (1) with a constant and controls Xt on FOMC announcement days only.
The ﬁrst column shows a regression of the returns on a recession dummy which takes on
the value of one if the corresponding FOMC announcement day fell into a recession as
deﬁned by the NBER and zero otherwise. The point estimates of 62 basis points for the
recession dummy and of 33 basis points for the constant imply that pre-FOMC returns
have been about 29 basis points higher in recessions than in expansions, indicating that the
pre-FOMC announcement returns are somewhat counter-cyclical. However, this diﬀerence
is only statistically diﬀerent from zero at the 10% level. The second column of Table 11
shows a regression on changes of the federal funds target rate at the policy meeting as well
as dummy variables for periods of monetary policy easing and tightening, respectively. 20
While the pre-FOMC returns are not aﬀected by the actual realized policy action, they are
larger in periods of monetary policy easing (which to a good extent overlap with recessions),
though the coeﬃcient is not signiﬁcant. The point estimate on thetightening cycle dummy
is essentially zero (both statistically and economically).
The controls in column 2 are ex-post measures of monetary policy stance. One might instead
think that pre-FOMC equity returns are related to market participants’ expectations about
the future path of monetary policy. We consider this conjecture next. We measure the
expected stance of monetary policy as the diﬀerence between the actual target federal funds
rate and the expected target rate one year in the future. Because of term-premia and
possible liquidity issues in interpreting market-implied measures, we use survey expectations
and, in particular, one year ahead consensus forecasts of the federal funds rate from the
BlueChip Financial Forecasts survey. 21 In addition to the expected stance of monetary
policy, the uncertainty around these expectations might also be important. We therefore
complement the regression with the interquartile range of the distribution of federal funds
rate predictions one year ahead from the BlueChip survey. This indicator gives us a rough
measure of disagreement among forecasters about future FOMC actions.
The third column of Table 11 summarizes the results of the regression of pre-FOMC returns
on our proxies of monetary policy expectations. The BlueChip measure of expected policy
stance has a negative coeﬃcient, indicating that pre-FOMC returns tend to be higher when
20We deﬁne tightening cycles as periods during which the federal funds rate target has been increasing
and easing cycles as periods during which the target rate as been falling or during which the Federal Reserve
conducted large-scale asset purchase programs.
21This survey asks some 40 to 50 participants ranging from broker-dealers to economic consulting ﬁrms to
provide forecasts of the quarterly average of a variety of economic and ﬁnancial variables up to two years in
the future. The survey is conducted towards the end of a calendar month and published at the beginning of
the next month. Based on this timing we select the survey that is closest to the next FOMC meeting.
17
=== PAGE 19 ===
market participants expect the FOMC to loosen policy. 22 At the same time, the coeﬃcient
on the disagreement measure is also negative, suggesting that pre-FOMC equity returns tend
to be higher when market participants agree more about what the FOMC is likely going to
do. Both coeﬃcients are statistically diﬀerent from zero at the one percent level, and jointly
explain about 10 percent of the time series variation of the pre-FOMC drift. However, the
large and statistically signiﬁcant constant in the regression implies that the two variables
fail to explain the average magnitude of pre-FOMC returns.
In sum, these results suggest that the pre-FOMC returns tend to be higher in recessions
and, more importantly, at times when investors expect the FOMC to loosen its stance of
monetary policy. Below, we attempt to ﬁt these facts with the predictions of models with
investor inattention, learning and political risk.
4.2.2 Political Risk
Pastor and Veronesi [2011] proposed a general equilibrium model in which the public sector
aﬀects stock returns through a policy decision that occurs at speciﬁed dates. In their model,
investors demand a risk premium for being exposed to political uncertainty regarding the
ex-ante unknown policy action. As a result, expected stock returns are higher in periods
when investors receive more signals about likely policy changes. Without these signals, stock
prices in the political risk model would follow a martingale prior to the announcement and
jump at the announcement (driven by a reduction of uncertainty). Hence, learning about
the likely outcome of the announcement distinguishes the political risk story from the pure
jump risk explanation that we dismissed above.
As discussed above, Federal Reserve oﬃcials are subject to a one week purdah period prior
to scheduled FOMC announcements. It is therefore implausible to assume that substantial
new information about the upcoming policy decision is being released in the 24 hours prior
to FOMC announcements. However, media coverage of the Federal Reserve generally picks
up markedly before the meeting as illustrated in Figure 8. This chart plots the time series
average of the combined number of articles about the Federal Reserve that appeared each day
in the print issues of the Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times over a ten day window
around FOMC announcements. While typically the largest number of articles was published
the day after FOMC meetings, the ﬁgure shows that media coverage increased signiﬁcantly
on the day of the announcement (meaning that the articles have been published before the
announcement). Thus, to the extent that investors use media reports to update their beliefs
22We ﬁnd qualitatively similar results when we use the one-year forward three-month overnight index swap
(OIS) rate as our expectation measure.
18
=== PAGE 20 ===
(rather than, for example, speeches by Fed oﬃcials occurring in the prior weeks), they may
indeed receive signals about future Fed policy right ahead of FOMC announcements and
consequently political uncertainty might indeed increase. 23
The model by Pastor and Veronesi [2011] has at least three testable implications that are
relevant in our context. First, the political risk premium is larger in weak economic condi-
tions. Second, stock returns should be more volatile in times of higher political uncertainty.
Third, stock returns should be more cross-correlated prior to policy changes. As we have
seen in Section 4.2.1, the pre-FOMC announcement return is indeed economically larger in
recessions than in expansions, consistent with the political uncertainty model. However,
that eﬀect is statistically not very signiﬁcant as relatively few observations in our sample fall
into NBER recession periods. The model’s prediction that stock returns are more volatile
in periods of political uncertainty is easily dismissed in our data. Indeed, as seen in Figure
6 above, realized stock return volatility tends to be lower on the mornings before FOMC
announcements than on other days. However, our ﬁnding that a single market factor appears
to be able to explain the cross-sectional variation of industry returns on FOMC announce-
ment days appears to be in line with the implication of the political risk model that the
cross correlation of stocks should be larger on days of higher political uncertainty.
Even without the assumption of more political uncertainty ahead of FOMC meetings, the
Pastor-Veronesi model might qualitatively give rise to a pre-FOMC announcement drift.
In fact, in their model investors constantly learn about the upcoming policy decision, and
thereby reduce their posterior uncertainty about political risk. This implies a positive, but
declining, expected instantaneous return as one gets closer to the policy decision. However,
because of the constant learning rate in the model, the mechanical reduction in posterior
uncertainty would likely imply a long drift into the meeting, rather than the steep one that
we observe in the data. With investor inattention, to which we turn in the next section, the
learning rate may be discontinuous instead.
In sum, the political risk premium model of Pastor and Veronesi—or some slight modiﬁcation
that allows for media as issuers of public signals—qualitatively captures some of our empirical
ﬁndings but appears inconsistent with the pre-FOMC volatility pattern.
23Related to this interpretation, Tetlock [2011] provides evidence that stale ﬁrm-speciﬁc news predict future
returns, indicating that investors trade based on media articles which contain old information. Huberman
[2001] and Carvalho, Klagge, and Moench [2011] discuss speciﬁc examples of the large eﬀects of media reports
on individual companies’ stock prices.
19
=== PAGE 21 ===
4.2.3 Investor Inattention and Limited Participation
Lamont and Frazzini [2007] have recently documented a qualitatively similar upward drift
in individual stock prices prior to scheduled earnings announcements. The authors discuss
“attention grabbing” as a potential behavioral explanation of their ﬁnding. According to
this explanation, investors are more likely to buy stocks which have attracted their attention
through media coverage of forthcoming earnings announcements. Since individual investors
are often short selling constrained, their decision to sell stocks is likely less aﬀected by
such events than their decision to buy stocks. Consequently, information-grabbing events
may induce predictable trading behavior of individual investors. While the pre-earnings
announcement drift is qualitatively similar to the pre-FOMC announcement drift, and we
cannot exclude that such an eﬀect may be at play, it seems unlikely that a bias of small
investors could itself generate such large abnormal returns for the aggregate U.S. and other
international stock markets.
However, investor inattention is not necessarily an irrational phenomenon and even more
sophisticated investors may exhibit some form of inattention. Indeed, as ﬁrst discussed by
Sims [2003], economic agents may face practical constraints as to how much relevant in-
formation they can process in real time. Consequently, they may choose to rationally pay
attention to some signals with higher precision than others. Such a framework of rationally
inattentive investors has recently been employed for example in Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh,
and Veldkamp [2009] to explain the business cycle variation in the relative performance of
mutual fund managers in picking stocks and timing the market. In their model, investors
allocate their attention between a signal about the aggregate and a signal about the idiosyn-
cratic component of cash ﬂows, subject to a constraint. At each point in time, investors
optimally focus on shocks that have the largest impact on returns.
Such a model might qualitatively explain some of the empirical ﬁndings reported above.
Indeed, stock market investors may decide to process information about the likely outcome
of the FOMC decision only shortly before the announcement when equity returns are more
responsive to news about monetary policy. At other times, instead, equity investors may
focus on some of the many other factors that aﬀect equity cash ﬂows. The increased media
coverage of the Fed right before FOMC announcements documented above is potentially in
line with increased investor attention ahead of the announcement. Hence, provided that the
FOMC announcement, on average, has a positive impact on stock returns, the information
processing constraint may result in a drift prior to the announcement, as investors focus on
the announcement only at that time. 24
24Fixed income investors, instead, may pay attention to the Fed at all times, as the future path of short
20
=== PAGE 22 ===
But why should equity prices react positively to FOMC announcements? In a model with
Bayesian mean-variance investors as in Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp [2009],
stock prices may rise because, after learning the signals, posterior expected mean returns are
higher and/or the posterior variance of payoﬀs is lower. That is, positive signals (relative to
investors’ prior) about a likely policy easing may push equity prices higher. Alternatively, as
investors learn more about the likely policy action, posterior uncertainty is reduced and stock
prices increase. The time-series evidence in Section 4.2.1 above suggests that both eﬀects
may be at work. Indeed, we ﬁnd that the pre-FOMC announcement returns are high when
market participants expect the Fed to loosen monetary policy and when the uncertainty
about future Fed policy (as measured by the disagreement among professional forecasters) is
low. Hence, if investors only update their expectations about monetary policy shortly before
the FOMC announcement, then these two eﬀects could well be consistent with the drift that
we observe.
But even if consistent with the time-series pattern, how likely is it that rational inattention
could explain the large unconditional return in our sample? While there may indeed be a
reduction of posterior variance ahead of FOMC meetings as investors become better informed
about monetary policy, the magnitude of this eﬀect would likely be limited. In addition, it is
not clear why a similar eﬀect would not be at play on days of important macroeconomic news
announcements, such as the employment report, when investors observe other informative
signals about the state of the economy. Indeed, as we saw above, these other announcements
do not to feature abnormal returns in our sample.
Can higher posterior mean returns explain the large magnitude of the pre-FOMC announce-
ment drift? Our sample from 1994 through 2011 featured a secular decline of policy rates
partly owing to the benign U.S. inﬂation environment over that period, as well as the ef-
fects of the 2007-2009 ﬁnancial crisis. It is precisely in this sample that some commentators
and academic paper have thought of central bank policy as having an asymmetric impact
on the ﬁnancial sector, with limited negative impact in booms and support in busts (see,
for example, Diamond and Rajan [2011]). Even if one might be inclined to argue that the
17-year-period has been characterized by such an asymmetry, in a rational expectations equi-
librium these investors should not have been consistently surprised. In other words, unless
one is willing to assume that the Fed systematically surprised equity investors over a 17 year
period, the higher-posterior-means channel with investor inattention is unlikely to explain
the pre-FOMC announcement drift.
Investor inattention may also give rise to risk premia through time varying stock market
term interest rates is arguably the most important determinant of ﬁxed income returns.
21
=== PAGE 23 ===
participation. Duﬃe [2010] presents a model where inattentive investors trade only infre-
quently and where frequent investors (specialists) earn a premium for bearing a larger share
of overall market risk around certain events. The original model studies price dynamics
ahead of anticipated supply and demand shocks. In our setup, we consider a slight modiﬁ-
cation and assume that inattentive investors are less likely to trade shortly ahead of FOMC
announcements because of the risk of being at an informational disadvantage over special-
ists. A larger share of the market risk would then be borne by the specialists, and in the
mean-variance setup of Duﬃe [2010], they will demand compensation in the form of higher
expected returns ahead of the announcement. In contrast with the political risk premium
model or the rational inattention setup discussed above, in this framework no additional
information or increase in overall uncertainty would be required to boost pre-announcement
returns. Instead, the positive excess return would be exclusively driven by a temporary
reduction of stock market participation.
Qualitatively, such an explanation is appealing as we ﬁnd that both instantaneous volatility
as well as trading volume are somewhat lower just before FOMC announcements, see Section
4.1.1 above. However, the limited participation model would also predict lower returns on
days surrounding FOMC announcements when inattentive investors are still in, or return
to, the market. We assess whether this may be true by estimating regression (1) for the
ﬁve days before and after FOMC announcements. Table 12 summarizes these regressions.
While the SPX features some negative returns in the ﬁve-day windows before and after
FOMC announcement days, none of them are statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
Moreover, the cumulative returns on the ﬁve days before and on the ﬁve days after scheduled
FOMC announcements are positive and also statistically insigniﬁcant. Thus, subject to the
power of our tests, we ﬁnd the limited participation model to be counterfactual on the
persistence of the return. In sum, although we see each of the three theories as somewhat
appealing, they appear counterfactual in some dimensions.
5 Conclusion
We have documented that U.S. and international equities experienced large excess returns
ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements in the 1994-2011 sample period. These returns,
which explain very large fractions of the equity premia, are robust to outliers, subsampling
and data-snooping. Other asset classes do not feature a pre-FOMC announcement drift, and
other macroeconomic news announcements do not generate analogous returns.
Several risk factors—including liquidity, volatility and jump risk—do not seem to account for
22
=== PAGE 24 ===
the returns. Moreover, the lack of new FOMC-related information ahead of the announce-
ment (purdah period) suggests that informational frictions may be an important factor in
understanding the returns.
We discussed three pricing models that could yield a smooth drift ahead of announcements
featuring political risk (Pastor and Veronesi [2011]), rationally inattentive investors (Kacper-
czyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp [2009]), and limited stock market participation (Duﬃe
[2010]). None of these models is fully consistent with all our ﬁndings. The political risk
explanation, with agents learning ahead of the announcement, appears at odds with the
lower volatility of stock returns in the hours before the FOMC announcement. Rationally
inattentive investors that optimally focus on FOMC-relevant information only shortly ahead
of the events may generate a drift either because of lower (posterior) variance, as agents
update their beliefs through signals, or because of higher (posterior) mean returns following
positive signal realizations (that is, when signals point to accommodative policy). We show
both eﬀects to be consistent with the time series evidence of pre-FOMC returns. In terms of
the unconditional return, however, the magnitude of the variance-reduction channel is to be
quantitatively assessed and is prima-facie at odds with the evidence on other major macroe-
conomic announcements. For the higher mean return channel to explain the unconditional
return, instead, agents would have had to be consistently surprised in one direction in the
17-year sample period, which is at odds with rational expectations. Finally the time-varying
limited market participation model, which matches the return and liquidity ﬁndings, pre-
dicts that the abnormal returns ahead of the announcement are reversed after the event.
Instead, we ﬁnd the pre-FOMC drift to be persistent. In sum, as of this paper’s writing, the
pre-FOMC announcement drift is a puzzle.
23
=== PAGE 25 ===
References
Acharya, V. V., and L. H. Pedersen (2005): “Asset pricing with liquidity risk,” Journal
of Financial Economics , 77(2), 375–410.
Amihud, Y. (2002): “Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series eﬀects,”
Journal of Financial Markets , 5(1), 31–56.
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson (1986): “Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread,” Journal
of Financial Economics , 17(2), 223–249.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2003): “Micro Ef-
fects of Macro Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 93(1), 38–62.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles,” The Journal of Finance , 59(4), 1481–1509.
Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and X. Zhang (2009): “International Stock Return
Comovements,” The Journal of Finance , 64(6), 2591–2626.
Bernanke, B. S., and K. N. Kuttner (2005): “What Explains the Stock Market’s
Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?,” The Journal of Finance , 60(3), 1221–1257.
Black, F. (1976): “Studies of stock price volatility changes,” in Proceedings of the 1976
Meetings of the American Statistical Association, Business and Economics Statistics Sec-
tion, pp. 177–181.
Blinder, A. S., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. D. Haan, and D.-J. Jansen
(2008): “Central bank communication and monetary policy: A survey of theory and
evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature , 46(4), 910–945.
Campbell, J. Y. (2003): “Consumption-based asset pricing,” in Handbook of the Eco-
nomics of Finance, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. M. Stulz, vol. 1 of Hand-
book of the Economics of Finance , chap. 13, pp. 803–887. Elsevier.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy ,
107(2), 205.
Campbell, J. Y., S. J. Grossman, and J. W ang (1993): “Trading Volume and Serial
Correlation in Stock Returns,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 108(4), 905–39.
Campbell, J. Y., and L. Hentschel (1992): “No news is good news: An asymmetric
model of changing volatility in stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics , 31(3),
281–318.
Carvalho, C., N. Klagge, and E. Moench (2011): “The persistent eﬀects of a false
news shock,” Journal of Empirical Finance , 18(4), 597–615.
Chuli, H., M. Martens, and D. van Dijk (2010): “Asymmetric eﬀects of federal funds
24
=== PAGE 26 ===
target rate changes on S&P100 stock returns, volatilities and correlations,” Journal of
Banking and Finance , 34(4), 834 – 839.
Diamond, D. W., and R. Rajan (2011): “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest
Rate Policy,” Working Paper 16994, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Duffie, D. (2010): “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capi-
tal,” Journal of Finance , 65(4), 1237–1267.
Ehrmann, M., and M. Fratzscher (2009): “Purdah—On the Rationale for Central
Bank Silence around Policy Meetings,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , 41(23),
517–528.
F ama, E., and K. French (1993): “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds,” Journal of ﬁnancial economics , 33(1), 3–56.
Fleming, M., and M. Piazzesi (2005): “Monetary Policy Tick-by-Tick,” Discussion pa-
per, University of Chicago, mimeo.
Fleming, M. J., and E. M. Remolona (1999): “Price Formation and Liquidity in the
U.S. Treasury Market: The Response to Public Information,” The Journal of Finance ,
54(5), 1901–1915.
Forbes, K. J., and R. Rigobon (2002): “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measur-
ing Stock Market Comovements,” Journal of Finance , 57(5), 2223–2261.
G¨urkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005): “Do Actions Speak Louder
Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,”
International Journal of Central Banking .
Huberman, G. (2001): “Contagious Speculation and a Cure for Cancer: A Nonevent that
Made Stock Prices Soar,” Journal of Finance , 56(1), 387–396.
Jones, C. M., O. Lamont, and R. L. Lumsdaine (1998): “Macroeconomic news and
bond market volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics , 47(3), 315 – 337.
Kacperczyk, M., S. V. Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp (2009): “Rational Atten-
tion Allocation Over the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Papers 15450, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Karolyi, G. A., and R. M. Stulz (1996): “Why Do Markets Move Together? An
Investigation of U.S.-Japan Stock Return Comovements,” The Journal of Finance , 51(3),
pp. 951–986.
Kuttner, K. N. (2001): “Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the
Fed funds futures market,” Journal of Monetary Economics , 47(3), 523–544.
Lamont, O., and A. Frazzini (2007): “The Earnings Announcement Premium and Trad-
ing Volume,” NBER Working Papers 13090, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Lucca, D. O., and F. Trebbi (2009): “Measuring Central Bank Communication: An
25
=== PAGE 27 ===
Automated Approach with Application to FOMC Statements,” NBER Working Papers
15367, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Pan, J. (2002): “The jump-risk premia implicit in options: evidence from an integrated
time-series study,” Journal of Financial Economics , 63(1), 3–50.
Pastor, L., and R. F. Stambaugh (2003): “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Political Economy , 111(3), 642–685.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi (2011): “Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia,” NBER
Working Papers 17464, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Politis, D. N., and J. P. Romano (1994): “The Stationary Bootstrap,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 89(428), 1303+.
Savor, P., and M. Wilson (2010): “How Much Do Investors Care About Macroeconomic
Risk? Evidence From Scheduled Economic Announcements,” Working paper, University
of Pennsylvania.
Shanken, J. (1992): “On the Estimation of Beta-Pricing Models,” Review of Financial
Studies, 5(1), 1–33.
Sims, C. (2003): “Implications of rational inattention,” Journal of Monetary Economics ,
50(3), 665–690.
Tetlock, P. C. (2011): “All the News That’s Fit to Reprint: Do Investors React to Stale
Information?,” Review of Financial Studies , 24(5), 1481–1512.
White, H. (2000): “A Reality Check for Data Snooping,” Econometrica, 68(5), 1097–1126.
26
=== PAGE 28 ===
Figure 1: Cumulative Returns on the SPX
0.51Percent09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMCnon-FOMC
Notes: This chart plots the average cumulative one-minute return on the S&P500 index (SPX) over a three
day window. The solid black line shows the average cumulative return on the SPX from 9:30 a.m. EST on the
days before scheduled FOMC announcements until 4:00 p.m. on days after scheduled FOMC announcements.
The dashed black line shows the cumulative return on the SPX over all other three day windows. The gray
shaded areas denote the pointwise 95% conﬁdence bands around the two means, respectively. The sample
period is from September 1994 through March 2011. The dashed vertical red line is set at 2:15 p.m. EST,
the time when FOMC announcements were typically released during that period.
27
=== PAGE 29 ===
Figure 2: Empirical Densities of 2pm-to-2pm SPX Returns
0.2.4.6Density-15-10-505102pm-to-2pm %log-return on the SPX FOMCnonFOMC
Notes: This chart plots empirical densities of the 2pm-to-2pm return on the SPX. The solid black line
shows the return on days ahead of scheduled FOMC announcements and the gray line shows the return on
average cumulative return all other days. The sample period is from September 1994 through March 2011.
28
=== PAGE 30 ===
Figure 3: Time Series of pre-FOMC Announcement Returns on the SPX
10/29/080246Rates in percent-50510Returns in percent19951996199719981999200020012002200320042005200620072008200920102011pre-FOMCpre-FOMC (12m rolling MA)Other days (12m rolling MA)Fed funds target rate (right-axis)
Notes: This chart plots the time series of 2pm-to-2pm pre-FOMC announcement returns on the SPX. The
solid black line shows the one-year moving average of these returns. The sample period is from September
1994 through March 2011.
29
=== PAGE 31 ===
Figure 4: CAPM for Industry and Size Portfolios on FOMC Announcement Days
AEROAGRICAUTOSBANKSBEERBLDMTBOOKSBOXESBUSSVCHEMSCHIPSCLTHSCNSTRCOALDRUGSELCEQFABPRFINFOODFUNGOLDGUNSHARDWHLTHHSHLDINSURLABEQMACHMEALSMEDEQMINESOILOTHERPAPERPERSVRLESTRTAILRUBBRSHIPSSMOKESODASOFTWSTEELTELCMTOYSTRANSTXTLSUTILWHLSLDEC1DEC10DEC2DEC3DEC4DEC5DEC6DEC7DEC8DEC9-.20.2.4.6.8Predicted Excess Return-.20.2.4.6.8Actual Excess Return
Notes: This chart documents the ﬁt of the CAPM for the 49 Fama-French industry portfolios and the ten
size decile portfolios on FOMC announcement days. For each portfolio, the horizontal axis shows the average
excess return earned on scheduled FOMC announcement days (in percent) whereas the vertical axis shows
the excess return implied by the CAPM. The sample period is from September 1994 through December
2010. The betas are estimated from a regression of the portfolio’s excess return on the excess return of the
market portfolio at the daily frequency (using all days in the sample). The result from the second stage
cross sectional regression is
¯RF OM C = −.099[0.10] + 0.468[0.149] ˆβ
where the standard errors are adjusted for the estimation error in betas following Shanken [1992]. The R2
of the regression is 65%. The dashed line shows the estimated regression line and the solid black line shows
the 45 degree line.
30
=== PAGE 32 ===
Figure 5: Cumulative Returns on International Stock Market Indexes Around FOMC
Announcements
0.2.4.6.8Percent09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30SPXFTSEDAXCAC40SMIIBEXTSX
Notes: This chart plots the average cumulative one-minute return on the SPX and other major international
equity market indexes over the three day window around scheduled FOMC announcements. The solid black
line shows the average cumulative return on the SPX from 9:30 a.m. EST on the days before scheduled
FOMC announcements until 4:00 p.m. on days after scheduled FOMC announcements. The colored dashed
lines show the cumulative returns on the German DAX, the U.K.’s FTSE100, the French CAC40, the Spanish
IBEX, the Swiss SMI, and the Canadion TSX over the same three day window. All stock indexes are only
shown during hours of trading on the respective exchanges. The sample period is from January 1996 through
March 2011. The dashed vertical red line is set at 2:15 p.m. EST, the time when FOMC announcements
were typically released during that period.
31
=== PAGE 33 ===
Figure 6: Intraday Realized V olatility of SPX Returns
05.00e-071.00e-061.50e-062.00e-06Returns squared09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMCnon-FOMC
Notes: This chart documents the pattern of intraday realized volatility over the three day window around
scheduled FOMC announcements. The solid black line shows the ﬁve minute rolling sum of squared tick-by-
tick returns on the SPX from 9:30 a.m. EST on the days before scheduled FOMC announcements until 4:00
p.m. on days after scheduled FOMC announcements. The sample period is from September 1994 through
March 2011. The dashed black line shows the same object over all other three day windows. Shaded areas
represent pointwise 95% conﬁdence bands around the mean.
32
=== PAGE 34 ===
Figure 7: Intraday T rading V olumes for the E-mini SP500 F uture
012345Relative trading volumes09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMC Statement09:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:3009:3010:3011:3012:3013:3014:3015:30FOMCnon-FOMC
Notes: This chart documents the pattern of intraday trading volume of E-mini SP500 futures over the
three day window around scheduled FOMC announcements. The solid black line shows the ﬁve minute
rolling average of the number of contracts traded from 9:30 a.m. EST on the days before scheduled FOMC
announcements until 4:00 p.m. on days after scheduled FOMC announcements. The sample period is from
January 1996 through March 2011. The dashed black line shows the same object over all other three day
windows. Shaded areas represent pointwise 95% conﬁdence bands around the mean.
33
=== PAGE 35 ===
Figure 8: Number of Fed-related articles in WSJ&FT around FOMC Announcement Days
01234Number of articles-6-5-4-3-2-10123456Days
Notes: This chart plots the average number of articles that appear in the print issues of the Wall Street
Journal and the Financial Times on each day around days of scheduled FOMC announcements. The gray
shaded area shows the two standard error deviation bands around the average. The sample period is from
February 1994 through March 2011.
34
=== PAGE 36 ===
T able 1: Scheduled FOMC meeting dates and times 1994-2011
year 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
1994 4-Feb-94 e 22-Mar-94e 17-May-94e 6-Jul-94e 16-Aug-94e 27-Sep-94 15-Nov-94 20-Dec-94
[11:05] [14:20] [14:26] [14:18] [13:17] [14:18] [14:20] [14:17]
1995 1-Feb-95 28-Mar-95 23-May-95 6-Jul-95 22-Aug-95 26-Sep-95 15-Nov-95 19-Dec-95
[14:14] [14:13] [14:13] [14:15] [14:13] [14:14] [14:16] [14:15]
1996 31-Jan-96 26-Mar-96 e 21-May-96 3-Jul-96 20-Aug-96 24-Sep-96 13-Nov-96 17-Dec-96
[14:16] [11:39] [14:16] [14:14] [14:17] [14:14] [14:17] [14:16]
1997 5-Feb-97 25-Mar-97 20-May-97 2-Jul-97 19-Aug-97 30-Sep-97 12-Nov-97 16-Dec-97
[14:13] [14:14] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15] [14:13] [14:12] [14:15]
1998 4-Feb-98 31-Mar-98 19-May-98 1-Jul-98 18-Aug-98 29-Sep-98 17-Nov-98 22-Dec-98
[14:12] [14:14] [14:13] [14:14] [14:12] [14:17] [14:19] [14:13]
1999 3-Feb-99 30-Mar-99 18-May-99 30-Jun-99 24-Aug-99 5-Oct-99 16-Nov-99 21-Dec-99
[14:12] [14:12] [14:11] [14:15] [14:14] [14:12] [14:16] [14:13]
2000 2-Feb-00 21-Mar-00 16-May-00 28-Jun-00 22-Aug-00 3-Oct-00 15-Nov-00 19-Dec-00
[14:14] [14:15] [14:13] [14:15] [14:14] [14:12] [14:12] [14:16]
2001 31-Jan-01 20-Mar-01 15-May-01 27-Jun-01 21-Aug-01 2-Oct-01 6-Nov-01 11-Dec-01
[14:15] [14:13] [14:15] [14:12] [14:13] [14:15] [14:20] [14:14]
2002 30-Jan-02 19-Mar-02 7-May-02 26-Jun-02 13-Aug-02 24-Sep-02 6-Nov-02 10-Dec-02
[14:16] [14:19] [14:14] [14:13] [14:14] [14:12] [14:14] [14:13]
2003 29-Jan-03 18-Mar-03 6-May-03 25-Jun-03 12-Aug-03 16-Sep-03 28-Oct-03 9-Dec-03
[14:16] [14:15] [14:13] [14:16] [14:15] [14:19] [14:14] [14:14]
2004 28-Jan-04 16-Mar-04 4-May-04 30-Jun-04 10-Aug-04 21-Sep-04 10-Nov-04 14-Dec-04
[14:14] [14:15] [14:16] [14:18] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15]
2005 2-Feb-05 22-Mar-05 3-May-05 30-Jun-05 9-Aug-05 20-Sep-05 1-Nov-05 13-Dec-05
[14:17] [14:17] [14:16] [14:15] [14:17] [14:17] [14:18] [14:13]
2006 31-Jan-06 28-Mar-06 10-May-06 29-Jun-06 8-Aug-06 20-Sep-06 25-Oct-06 12-Dec-06
[14:14] [14:17] [14:17] [14:16] [14:14] [14:13] [14:13] [14:14]
2007 31-Jan-07 21-Mar-07 9-May-07 28-Jun-07 7-Aug-07 18-Sep-07 31-Oct-07 11-Dec-07
[14:14] [14:15] [14:15] [14:14] [14:14] [14:15] [14:15] [14:15]
2008 30-Jan-08 18-Mar-08 30-Apr-08 25-Jun-08 5-Aug-08 16-Sep-08 29-Oct-08 16-Dec-08
[14:14] [14:14] [14:15] [14:19] [14:13] [14:14] [14:17] [14:11]
2009 28-Jan-09 18-Mar-09 29-Apr-09 24-Jun-09 12-Aug-09 23-Sep-09 4-Nov-09 16-Dec-09
[14:14] [14:17] [14:16] [14:18] [14:16] [14:16] [14:18] [14:15]
2010 27-Jan-10 16-Mar-10 28-Apr-10 23-Jun-10 10-Aug-10 21-Sep-10 3-Nov-10 14-Dec-10
[14:17] [14:14] [14:14] [14:16] [14:15] [14:15] [14:16] [14:15]
2011 26-Jan-11 15-Mar-11 27-Apr-11 e 22-Jun-11e 9-Aug-11e 20-Sep-11e 2-Nov-11e 13-Dec-11e
[14:16] [14:13] [12:34] [12:27] [14:18] [14:23] [12:33] [14:12]
Notes: This table reports dates of scheduled FOMC meetings. The marker “ e” denotes meetings that are excluded
from our sample. The time of the announcements, reported in square brackets, from 1994 to 2004 are from Fleming
and Piazzesi [2005] and are based on the time-stamp of Bloomberg or Dow Jones newswires. We update this list for
the remaining sample using the same method.
=== PAGE 37 ===
T able 2: Descriptive Statistics
FOMC non-FOMC
Mean St.Dev. Max Min N.Obs. Mean St.Dev. Max Min N.Obs.
SPX-2pm .488 1.215 9.531 -2.927 131 .004 1.218 12.064 -13.962 4011
SPX .338 1.144 5.006 -2.571 132 .009 1.262 10.953 -9.464 4034
MKTVW .365 1.118 5.168 -2.593 132 .01 1.25 10.898 -9.43 4043
MKTEW .31 .949 4.657 -2.063 132 .061 1.063 10.196 -8.376 4043
DAX .472 1.251 4.43 -3.232 130 .011 1.536 10.798 -7.439 4064
FTSE100 .341 1.204 7.742 -3.494 132 -.003 1.215 9.385 -9.264 4052
CAC40 .528 1.42 8.84 -2.526 131 -.003 1.469 10.601 -9.466 4073
IBEX .511 1.346 9.009 -3.453 131 .01 1.466 13.502 -9.58 4033
SMI .301 1.141 5.993 -3.014 132 .015 1.245 10.788 -8.106 4019
TSX .225 .982 3.753 -2.07 131 .015 1.144 9.37 -9.78 4016
NIKKEI .008 1.805 7.463 -11.146 125 -.017 1.557 13.24 -12.104 3947
FF1 .001 .053 .48 -.155 131 -.001 .039 .48 -.985 3905
FF2 -.004 .051 .21 -.165 131 -.001 .032 .47 -.52 3905
ED4 -.012 .086 .225 -.25 120 -.002 .08 .735 -.475 3670
Tsy2Y -.006 .071 .226 -.231 131 -.001 .061 .367 -.469 3838
Tsy10Y -.002 .074 .194 -.516 130 -.001 .061 .334 -.275 3810
EURUSD -.065 .57 1.228 -2.961 132 -.001 .641 3.003 -4.621 4036
YENUSD .075 .626 1.864 -1.958 132 -.007 .725 3.24 -5.63 4037
AMIHUD .00002 .00005 .0004 0 120 .00002 .00005 .001 0 3686
VOLUME .825 .351 2.675 .294 120 1.041 .419 5.283 .129 3686
lVIX-2pm 23.613 9.541 75.52 11.04 120 23.005 9.004 76.63 9.82 2995
VIXres-2pm 0 1.467 5.565 -6.3 118 0 1.669 19.936 -12.24 2930
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the variables used in this paper on FOMC days and non-FOMC
days. The sample period is 1994:09-2011:03. SPX-2pm denotes the cum-dividend log excess return on the S&P500
index from 2pm the previous day to 2pm the current day. SPX denotes the close-to-close log excess return on the
S&P500 index. MKTVW is the value-weighted market return from CRSP and MKTEW is the corresponding equally-
weighted return. DAX, FTSE100, CAC40, IBEX, SMI, TSX and NIKKEI denote the close-to-close cum-dividend log
excess returns German, British, French, Spanish, Swiss, Canadian, and Japanese benchmark stock indexes, respectively.
FF1, FF2, and ED4 are the daily rate changes implied by the ﬁrst and second Federal funds futures contract as well
as the fourth Eurodollar contract. Tsy2Y and Tsy10y are the daily rate changes for the on-the-run Treasury notes for
the 2-year and 10-year maturity. EURUSD and YENUSD are the daily log change in the spot exchange rate of the
US Dollar with respect to the EURO and the YEn, respectively. AMIHUD is the daily Amihud price impact measure
(absolute price change divided by total number of shares traded) for the SPY exchange traded fund. VOLUME denotes
the trading volume (number of shares traded) for the SPY relative to its past 21-day moving average. lVIX is the
level of the VIX at 2 pm on the previous day and VIXres-2pm is the estimated residual of regression 2.
36
=== PAGE 38 ===
T able 3: Main Regression Table: Daily SPX excess returns
Dependent V ariable: SPX %log-excess-return
Type of return: 2pm-to-2pm 2pm-to-close close-to-close
FOMC dummy 0 .488 0 .484 0.002 0.330 0 .049
[0.11]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.09] [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.06]
Const. 0 .004 0.009 0 .015
[0.02] [0.02] [0 .01]
Annual ex-return FOMC 3 .89 2.70 0 .62
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 0 .89 2.03 3 .65
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 1 .14 0.84 0 .20
Obs. 4142 4166 6066
N. of FOMC 131 132 236
Dates Sep94-Mar11 Sep94-Mar11 Feb70-Jan94
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%.
Robust standard error shown in brackets. FOMC Sharpe Ratio are annualized Sharpe-ratios on FOMC
dates.
37
=== PAGE 39 ===
T able 4: Summary Statistics: 2pm-to-2pm SPX log-excess returns
All Observations Excl. top/bottom 1
FOMC nonFOMC FOMC nonFOMC
Mean .488 .004 .445 .009
[.11] [.02] [.08] [.02]
St. Dev. 1.22 1.22 .88 .99
Skew 3.18 -.24 .61 -.16
Kurtosis 25.61 15.91 5.22 3.71
Max 9.53 12.06 3.69 3.08
Min -2.93 -13.96 -2.18 -3.25
Obs. 131 4011 129 3931
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the 2pm-2pm
log excess returns on the SPX on FOMC days and non-FOMC
days. Standard errors for the mean reported in square brackets.
The sample period is Sep, 1 1994 to Mar 31, 2011.
=== PAGE 40 ===
T able 5: CRSP Size Portfolio Regressions
Dependent V ariable: %Log-excess-return of CRSP portfolio index
Portfolio: Value Weighted Equal Weighted 1st Decile 2nd Decile 3rd Decile 4th Decile
FOMC dummy 0 .36 0 .25 0 .20 0 .40 0 .42 0 .44
[0.10]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗∗ [0.08]∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .01 0 .06 0 .02 0 .02 0 .01 0 .01
[0.02] [0 .02]∗∗∗ [0.02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02]
Annual ex-return FOMC 2 .91 2 .47 1 .79 3 .31 3 .46 3 .55
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 2 .24 15 .37 5 .49 3 .49 3 .44 2 .15
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .92 0 .92 0 .71 0 .85 0 .93 0 .98
Portfolio: 5th Decile 6th Decile 7th Decile 8th Decile 9th Decile 10th Decile
FOMC dummy 0 .46 0 .40 0 .39 0 .39 0 .37 0 .31
[0.11]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .01 0 .01 0 .02 0 .01 0 .02 0 .01
[0.02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02]
Annual ex-return FOMC 3 .75 3 .27 3 .27 3 .19 3 .09 2 .52
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 2 .59 3 .45 4 .29 3 .21 3 .63 1 .73
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 1 .07 1 .03 1 .05 0 .99 0 .98 0 .80
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown
in brackets. Sample starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 31, 2011 (4166 daily observations).
39
=== PAGE 41 ===
T able 6: CRSP V alue-W eighted Industry Portfolio Regressions
Dependent V ariable: %log-excess-return of CRSP industry portfolio
Industry Portfolio: AGRIC FOOD SODA BEER SMOKE TOYS FUN
FOMC dummy 0 .24 0 .10 −0.14 0 .01 −0.07 0 .32 0 .50
[0.17] [0 .08] [0 .22] [0 .09] [0 .15] [0 .12]∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .39 0 .37 −0.10 0 .09 −0.06 0 .61 0 .66
Industry Portfolio: BOOKS HSHLD CLTHS HLTH MEDEQ DRUGS CHEMS
FOMC dummy 0 .37 0 .23 0 .38 0 .24 0 .19 0 .26 0 .44
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.09]∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗ [0.10]∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .73 0 .67 0 .77 0 .57 0 .54 0 .72 0 .98
Industry Portfolio: RUBBR TXTLS BLDMT CNSTR STEEL FABPR MACH
FOMC dummy 0 .39 0 .51 0 .38 0 .43 0 .50 0 .51 0 .49
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.16]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.18]∗∗ [0.16]∗∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .80 0 .77 0 .70 0 .63 0 .78 0 .64 0 .98
Industry Portfolio: ELCEQ AUTOS AERO SHIPS GUNS GOLD MINES
FOMC dummy 0 .52 0 .51 0 .45 0 .25 0 .13 0 .26 0 .56
[0.14]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗∗∗ [0.15]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗ [0.13] [0 .22] [0 .16]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .97 0 .86 0 .79 0 .49 0 .29 0 .28 0 .89
Industry Portfolio: COAL OIL UTIL TELCM PERSV BUSSV HARDW
FOMC dummy 0 .40 0 .29 0 .10 0 .13 0 .42 0 .36 0 .40
[0.27] [0 .12]∗∗ [0.09] [0 .12] [0 .13]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.17]∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .43 0 .67 0 .34 0 .28 0 .83 0 .93 0 .63
Industry Portfolio: SOFTW CHIPS LABEQ PAPER BOXES TRANS WHLSL
FOMC dummy 0 .48 0 .54 0 .44 0 .18 0 .27 0 .45 0 .30
[0.15]∗∗∗ [0.16]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗ [0.12]∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .80 0 .82 0 .83 0 .46 0 .57 0 .99 0 .78
Industry Portfolio: RTAIL MEALS BANKS INSUR RLEST FIN OTHER
FOMC dummy 0 .33 0 .27 0 .56 0 .42 0 .35 0 .69 0 .30
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗ [0.14]∗∗∗ [0.16]∗∗ [0.19]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 0 .74 0 .64 0 .72 0 .77 0 .52 0 .92 0 .61
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Ro-
bust standard error shown in brackets. Sample starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 31, 2011 (4166 daily
observations).
40
=== PAGE 42 ===
T able 7: International Stock Market Index Regressions
Dependent V ariable: %log-excess-return of stock market index
Stock Market Index: DAX FTSE100 CAC40 IBEX SMI TSX NIKKEI
FOMC dummy 0 .46 0 .34 0 .53 0 .50 0 .29 0 .21 0 .02
[0.11]∗∗∗ [0.11]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.12]∗∗∗ [0.10]∗∗∗ [0.09]∗∗ [0.16]
Const. 0 .01 −0.00 −0.00 0 .01 0 .02 0 .01 −0.02
[0.02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02] [0 .02]
Annual ex-return FOMC 3 .69 2 .71 4 .15 4 .05 2 .41 1 .79 0 .06
Annual ex-return non-FOMC 2 .63 −1.17 −1.68 1 .31 2 .34 3 .20 −4.08
FOMC Sharpe Ratio 1 .07 0 .80 1 .05 1 .07 0 .75 0 .65 0 .01
Obs. 4194 4184 4204 4164 4151 4147 4072
N. of FOMC 130 132 131 131 132 131 125
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in
brackets. Sample starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 31, 2011.
41
=== PAGE 43 ===
T able 8: Other Macroecononomic Announcements
Dependent V ariable: %close-to-close SPX log-excess-return
Event: NFPAY INCLM GDPADV ISM IP
Eventt Dummy 0 .10 −0.01 0 .02 0 .23 0 .05
[0.09] [0 .05] [0 .16] [0 .10]∗∗ [0.09]
Eventt+1 Dummy −0.09 −0.01 0 .10 −0.04 0 .01
[0.09] [0 .05] [0 .14] [0 .09] [0 .10]
No. of events 199 856 60 202 199
Event: HSTART PPI CPI PI ALL
Eventt Dummy 0 .05 0 .04 0 .04 0 .03 0 .04
[0.09] [0 .10] [0 .09] [0 .09] [0 .04]
Eventt+1 Dummy 0 .13 −0.11 −0.07 −0.00 −0.01
[0.09] [0 .08] [0 .10] [0 .09] [0 .04]
No. of events 200 201 202 199 1976
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets.
Sample starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 30, 2011 (4386 daily observations). The table does not report the coeﬃcient on a constant, which is
included in each regression. The events are: Employment Report (NFPAY), Initial Claims (INCLM), Advance GDP (GDPADV), ISM manufacturing
index (ISM), Industrial Production (IP), Housing Starts (HS), Producer Price Index (PPI), Consumer Price Index (CPI), Personal Income (PI), All
economic releases (ALL).
42
=== PAGE 44 ===
T able 9: Other Asset Classes
Dependent V ariable: %∆ Yields in %∆Log Exchange Rates
Instrument: FF-1 FF-2 ED-4 TREAS-2Y TREAS-10Y USD-EURO USD-YEN
FOMC dummy 0 .002 −0.003 −0.011 −0.005 −0.001 −0.064 0 .083
[0.00] [0 .00] [0 .01] [0 .01] [0 .01] [0.05] [0 .06]
Const. −0.001 −0.001 −0.002 −0.001 −0.001 −0.001 −0.007
[0.00]∗ [0.00]∗∗ [0.00] [0 .00] [0 .00] [0.01] [0 .01]
Obs. 4036 4036 3790 3969 3940 4168 4169
N. of FOMC 131 131 120 131 130 132 132
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in
brackets. Sample starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 30, 2011. FF-1 and -2 are rates implied by the ﬁrst and second fed funds futures
contracts. ED-4 is the 4th eurodollar implied rate. Treas-2y and -10y are yields on the 2- and 10-y benchmark Treasuries. USD-EURO
and USD-YEN and exchange rates in percent
43
=== PAGE 45 ===
T able 10: Controlling for Liquidity and V olatility Risk
Dependent V ariable: %Log returns of 2pm-to-2pm SP500 index
Liqu. deﬁned on: SPY SP500 E-mini
FOMC dummy 0 .55 0 .53 0.54 0 .53
[0.12]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗ [0.13]∗∗∗ [0.07]∗∗∗
Amihud Illiquid. 547 .32 97.91
[300.99]∗ [49.30]∗∗
Bid-Ask 0 .31 0.34
[0.27] [1.25]
Relat. Trade Vols −0.03 −0.10
[0.04] [0.03]∗∗∗
VIX(lag) 0 .00 0.00
[0.00] [0.00]
VIX(innovat.) −0.60 −0.60
[0.02]∗∗∗ [0.02]∗∗∗
Const. 0 .00 −0.06 −0.01 −0.06
[0.02] [0 .07] [0.02] [0 .31]
Obs. 3574 3574 3189 3189
N. of FOMC 117 117 107 107
Dates 199601 .201103 199601.201103 199709.201103 199709.201103
Notes: *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard
error shown in brackets. FOMC Sharpe Ratio are annualized Sharpe-ratios on FOMC dates.
44
=== PAGE 46 ===
T able 11: Time-series regressions
Dependent Variable: %2pm-to-2pm SPX log-
excess-return
(1) (2) (3)
NBER 0 .62∗
[0.33]
Ease Cycle 0 .47
[0.43]
Tight Cycle 0 .07
[0.26]
FFtarget −0.045
[0.81]
Stance −0.38∗∗∗
[0.14]
Disagreement −1.03 ∗ ∗
[0.42]
Constant 0 .33∗∗∗ 0.33∗∗∗ 1.13∗∗∗
[0.08] [0 .11] [0 .26]
Observations 130 130 130
Adjusted R2 0.05 0 .01 0 .09
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant at 5%,
*signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets. The sample starts on
Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 30, 2011. The dependent variable is the cum dividend
log excess return on the S&P500 from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC
announcement to 2 pm on that day. NBER is a dummy variable that takes on the
value of one when the corresponding FOMC day refers into a recession as deﬁned by
the NBER and zero otherwise. Ease Cycle and Tight Cycle are dummy variables that
take on the value of one if the corresponding observation can be classiﬁed as falling
into a period of monetary loosening or tightening, respectively. FFTarget is the target
federal funds rate on the day before the corresponding FOMC day. Stance is the
diﬀerence between the consensus federal funds rate expectation one year ahead from
the BlueChip Financial Forecast Survey and the current target rate. Disagreement is
the interquartile range of fed funds expectations one year ahead from the cross section
of forecasters in the BlueChip survey.
45
=== PAGE 47 ===
T able 12: SP500 return before and after announcement
Dependent Variable: %2pm-to-2pm SPX
log-excess-return
1(FOMC t+5) -0.054 [0.09]
1(FOMC t+4) -0.087 [0.10]
1(FOMC t+3) 0.085 [0.09]
1(FOMC t+2) -0.029 [0.10]
1(FOMC t+1) 0.077 [0.08]
1(FOMC t) 0.488 [0.11]***
1(FOMC t−1) -0.003 [0.13]
1(FOMC t−2) 0.062 [0.09]
1(FOMC t−3) 0.078 [0.11]
1(FOMC t−4) -0.024 [0.10]
1(FOMC t−5) -0.076 [0.08]
∑5
i=1 1(FOMC t+1) 0.010
P-value 0.961∑5
i=1 1(FOMC t−1) 0.044
P-value 0.844
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. *** signiﬁcant at 1%, ** signiﬁcant
at 5%, *signiﬁcant at 10%. Robust standard error shown in brackets. The
sample starts on Sep 1, 1994 and ends on Mar 30, 2011. Number of observa-
tions is 4,142. The dependent variable is the cum dividend log excess return
on the S&P500 from 2pm on the day before a scheduled FOMC announce-
ment to 2 pm on that day. 1(FOMC t+h) denotes a dummy variable which
takes on a value of one h days before a scheduled FOMC announcement day.∑5
i=1 1(FOMC t+1) denotes the sum of the coeﬃcients on the dummy vari-
ables for the ﬁve days before FOMC announcements while ∑5
i=1 1(FOMC t−1)
denotes the sum of coeﬃcients on the dummy variables for the ﬁve days after
FOMC announcements.
46