
=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
 
  
The Overnight Drift  
Nina Boyarchenko  | Lars C. Larsen  | Paul Whelan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N O.  9 17 
F EBR U ARY  20 20  
 
RE VI S E D 
A UG US T 2 02 2 
 
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
The Overnight Drift 
Nina Boyarchenko, Lars C. Larsen, and Paul Whelan 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 917 
February 2020; revised August 2022 
JEL classification: G13, G14, G15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper documents that U.S. equity returns are large and positive during the opening hours of 
European markets. These returns are pervasive, economically large, and highly statistically significant. 
Consistent with models of inventory risk, we demonstrate a strong relationship with order imbalances at 
the close of the preceding U.S. trading day. Rationalizing unconditionally positive “overnight drift” 
returns, we uncover an asymmetric reaction to demand shocks: market selloffs generate robust positive 
overnight reversals, while reversals following market rallies are much more modest. We argue that 
demand shock asymmetry can arise in inventory management models with time-varying dealer risk 
bearing capacity. 
 
Key words: overnight returns, immediacy, volatility risk, inventory risk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
 
Boyarchenko: Federal Reserve Bank of New York (email: nina.boyarchenko@ny.frb.org). Larsen, 
Whelan: Copenhagen Business School (emails: lcl.fi@cbs.dk, pawh.fi@cbs.dk). The authors thank 
Torben Andersen, Vincent Bogousslavsky, Andrea Buraschi, Pasquale Della Corte, Jens Dick-Nielsen, 
Darrell Duffie, Bjørn Eraker, Michael Fleming, Mathieu Fournier, Thomas Geelen, Ravi Jagannathan, 
David Lando, Dong Lou, Charles Martineau, Alex Michaelides, Philippe Mueller, Lasse Pedersen, 
Fabrice Tourre, Anders Trolle, Gyuri Venter, Andrea Vedolin, and audiences at various conferences and 
seminars for their comments and suggestions. Paul Whelan gratefully acknowledges financial support 
from the Danish Council for Independent Research (grant no. 9037-00105B) and the Danish Finance 
Institute (DFI). Lars C. Larsen gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Center for Financial 
Frictions (FRIC, grant no. DNRF102).  
 
This paper presents preliminary findings and is being distributed to economists and other interested 
readers solely to stimulate discussion and elicit comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of 
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the 
Federal Reserve System. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the author(s). 
 
To view the authors’ disclosure statements, visit 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr917.html. 
=== PAGE 3 ===
Since the advent of electronic trading in the late 1990’s, U.S. S&P 500 index futures have traded
close to 24 hours a day. In this paper, we document that, despite the 24 hour nature of the market,
returns do not accrue linearly around the clock. In fact, the largest positive returns are between
2:00 and 3:00 - the opening of European markets in U.S. Eastern Time terms (ET) - averaging
3.7% on an annualized basis (1.48 basis points per day). We dub these positive average returns
the ‘overnight drift’ and argue that the pattern is most likely driven by the overnight resolution of
order imbalances arising from the end of the preceding U.S. trading day.
We begin by dissecting trading during the U.S. overnight session and introduce a number of
tests which demonstrate that returns during the 2:00 – 3:00 window are special in both economic
and statistical terms. First, inspired by the data mining literature, we conduct a bootstrap exercise
to estimate the distribution of test statistics of average hourly returns. Considering the distribution
of point and t-statistic estimates for all hours we find a clear bi-modal distribution, with the 2:00 –
3:00 return corresponding to the higher mode. Strikingly, when comparing the distribution for all
hours with the overnight drift hour, we see that the lower 2.5% interval for overnight drift return
point estimates lies above the pooled 97.5% interval. Likewise, the lower 2.5% interval for the
distribution of t-statistics lies above the pooled 97.5% interval. Second, accounting for multiple
testing concerns, we consider Bonferroni and Benjamini-Yekutieli adjusted critical values and show
that the only hour which remains consistently significant in full sample and subsamples is 2:00 –
3:00.
Next, following the fund alpha literature, we study the persistence of overnight drift returns: they
are positive in 20 out of 23 years since 1998 and statistically significant in 17 of these. In contrast,
for example, opening hour returns between 9:00 – 10:00 are on average large and negative but only
during recessionary periods (2000-2003, 2007-2008 & 2009) and flat otherwise. Furthermore, we
show that the 2:00 – 3:00 return is statistically significant on every day of the week, and in 9 out
of 12 months of the year, while returns during other periods of the day enter sporadically.
The theoretical market microstructure literature offers two broad types of potential explanations
for the overnight drift pattern: the presence of differentially informed traders in the market, generat-
ing asymmetric information, and inventory (risk) management by market makers. For asymmetric
information alone to explain the overnight drift, (1) news revelation to informed traders would
need to systematically occur between the U.S. market close and the European market open and
(2) the information revealed overnight would need to be positive on average. We show that stan-
1
=== PAGE 4 ===
dard information releases, such as macroeconomic, monetary policy and earnings announcements,
do not explain the overnight drift, suggesting that asymmetric information alone is an implausible
explanation for the overnight drift.
Studying potential explanations, we argue that unconditionally positive returns around the
opening of European markets are consistent with predictions from models of inventory management
and demand for immediacy, such as Grossman and Miller (1988) (GM). The framework of GM shows
that risk-averse market makers profit by providing liquidity to investors with asynchronous trading
demands, generating mean reversion in prices as market makers absorb shocks to their inventories.1
To understand how inventory management concerns can lead to the overnight drift, suppose there
is selling pressure during the day, translating into an overall negative order imbalance by the end
of regular trading hours. Market makers become net buyers, bearing inventory risk until they are
able to sell to new market participants arriving overnight; however, they demand compensation for
this in terms of positive expected returns.
A natural question that arises is why do price reversals not occur earlier upon the opening of
overnight markets? The answer is that, even though overnight volumes have grown steadily over
our sample period, the close of regular trading at 16:15 marks the only time of the day when
volumes jump discontinuously down. Even in recent years volumes during Asian open hours remain
substantially below volumes at the U.S. close: between 2009 – 2020 trading volumes in regular
Asian hours (18:00 – 2:00) were 50 to 100 times lower than volumes during U.S. trading hours.
Indeed, recasting the trading day in volume time, where each period has a fixed number of contracts
traded, returns increase linearly in signed volume until around 60,000 contracts, corresponding to
the average number of contracts traded by 3:00. 2 In other words, it takes market makers roughly
60,000 contracts to offset end-of-day order imbalances as of the previous day, with this re-balancing
occurring earlier during the night as trading increases during Asian market hours. Conditioning
on end-of-day order imbalances, we show the relationship between signed volume and returns in
volume-time is approximately linear but asymmetric; thus, re-cast in volume time, demand shock
asymmetry is a more general feature of the data observable throughout Asian and European hours.
We study in greater detail predictions from GM-type models which state that returns for pro-
1The CME does not designate ‘specialist’ market makers in e-mini futures. Instead, effective market makers are any
participants willing to post limit orders on both sides of the order book and hence supplying liquidity (immediacy) to other
traders in the market.
2As pointed out by Easley, de Prado, and O’Hara (2012), in the high-frequency world, trade time, as captured by volume,
is a more relevant metric than clock time and models of immediacy and inventory risk, such as Grossman and Miller (1988),
are implicitly set in volume time as it is assumed that a fixed number of trades occur in each period.
2
=== PAGE 5 ===
viding immediacy should be higher when order imbalances are larger or uncertainty is higher. In
order to exploit as much data as possible and to account for a time-trend in volumes, our main
proxy for order imbalance is defined as relative signed volume, computed as signed volume over
gross volume, and denoted RSV t.3 On average, close-to-close RSV t is negative consistent with the
idea that the futures market is traded as a hedging instrument for the underlying.
Sorting our full sample based on closing RSV close
t , sampled between 15:15 – 16:15, we show that
order imbalances at U.S. close are followed by overnight price reversals as predicted by inventory
models and that price reversals following market sell-offs are much stronger than following market
rallies. Moreover, price reversals are accompanied by contemporaneous trading flows in the expected
direction.4 We also study the additional intuitive prediction that market makers should not require
a liquidity premium for holding zero inventory, and therefore order imbalances close to zero should
have little price impact. Consistent with this idea, when closing imbalances are approximately zero,
we find reversal returns which are economically small and statistically indistinguishable from zero.
Next, we study the relationship between overnight returns and uncertainty. In double sorts
on RSV close
t and the end-of-day level of VIX, we show that, conditional on the level of the VIX,
average overnight returns are higher following days with greater negative end-of-day order imbal-
ance. Conversely, conditional on the size of negative end-of-day order imbalance, average overnight
returns are higher following days with greater end-of-day levels of the VIX. That is, consistent
with the predictions of models of immediacy, price reversals are larger following days with larger
end-of-day order imbalances and even more so if the large order imbalances coincide with periods
of elevated uncertainty.
Double sorts on order imbalances and uncertainty also reveal that the distribution of the VIX
is similar across positive and negative order imbalance days, suggesting that the asymmetry in
price reversals is unlikely driven by a correlation between order imbalances and the level of asset
return variance. Instead, we speculate that this asymmetry is related to market maker time-varying
risk-bearing capacity. The literature on financial intermediation has proposed a number of mech-
anisms that can generate variation in effective risk aversion, including regulatory constraints, risk-
management constraints, and funding constraints. Studying a simple extension to the benchmark
3Our findings are robust to tests based on signed volume over the sample period 2007 – 2020 for which total gross volumes
were relatively stable.
4While hourly RSVt’s are negative during regular trading hours they are economically small at market close. However,
overnight imbalances are positive and strongly statistically significant between 2:00 and 3:00, mirroring unconditionally positive
returns during this hour.
3
=== PAGE 6 ===
GM model, we show that demand shock asymmetry arises when dealers face value-at-risk (VaR)
constraints as in Danıelsson, Shin, and Zigrand (2004) and Adrian and Shin (2010, 2014a). In
the data, negative end-of-day imbalances are associated with positive changes in return variance. 5
Positive shocks to volatility increase the likelihood that dealer constraints bind, magnifying their ef-
fective risk aversion during sell-offs and increasing required compensation for providing immediacy.
During market rallies the opposite intuition holds. 6
We confirm our inventory risk conjecture more formally by estimating high frequency predictabil-
ity regressions of returns on end-of-day order imbalance, and find statistically and economically
significant loadings on the hours when London and Frankfurt financial markets open. Thus, high
frequency returns become predictable as market makers transact with new participants arriving
overnight, trading away order imbalances remaining from the previous U.S. trading day. Exploiting
high frequency predictability regressions further, we conduct a natural experiment to test the rela-
tionship between the overnight price reversals and the arrival of overnight traders. In particular, we
exploit the fact that while the U.S. observes daylight savings time (DST), Japan does not, so that,
as seen from the perspective of a U.S. trader, the timing of Japanese market opening changes exoge-
nously from 19:00 in winter to 20:00 in summer. 7 Indeed, accounting for DST, return predictability
around Tokyo open shifts forward by one hour when moving from winter to summer time, so that
exogenous variation in the time of arrival of liquidity traders leads to predictable variation in the
returns earned overnight. Expanding the natural experiment to also include the 3 weeks of the
year when the DST is asynchronous between the U.S. and Europe, we again find that the overnight
return predictability shifts to the 4:00 – 5:00 hour (the first hour of regular trading in London and
Frankfurt when the U.S. – Europe time difference is 4 hours).
We conclude by studying a set of trading strategies that exploit overnight price reversals. Pre-
transaction costs, a trading strategy that goes long the S&P 500 futures between 2:00 and 3:00 earns
a Sharpe ratio of 1.1 and accounting for bid-ask spreads this reduces to −0.5. Extending the trading
interval to the sub-period between 1:30 – 3:30 increases the pre-transaction cost Sharpe ratio to 1 .3
but with an associated post-transaction Sharpe ratio equal to 0 .3. This is exactly what is predicted
by models of inventory risk: market makers position their limit order books to incentivize trades
5This is the so called ‘leverage effect’ which is the well studied empirical fact that equity volatility tends to rise when
returns are negative, and fall when returns are positive (see, for example, Black, 1976).
6Alternatively, if the permitted VaR is given as a fraction of equity, rather than as a dollar amount, the VaR constraint
becomes tighter when market maker equity declines. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) show that similar dynamics can also
arise when market makers have to post (cash) margins to fund levered positions.
7The Tokyo Stock Exchange trades from 9:00 to 15:00 in Japanese Standard Time.
4
=== PAGE 7 ===
that bring their inventory closer to their targets, and do so by making the trade, which pays the
bid-ask spread, non-profitable.
Finally, we note that although the documented high frequency return patterns of this paper are
not easily profitable, the persistent presence of the overnight drift suggests that the intraday timing
of portfolio adjustments should be an important consideration for asset managers and institutional
investors. Indeed, market developments suggest that arbitrageurs are trying to capitalize on the
patterns identified in this paper, with NightShares launching two exchange-traded funds (ETFs) in
June 2022, targeted specifically at earning the overnight drift, citing financing costs and end-of-day
order imbalances as driving forces behind the pattern. 8
Related Literature: In the time-series, existing studies have documented that equities earn
a substantial proportion of their returns during the overnight period compared to the regular
U.S. trading-hours (for example, Cliff, Cooper, and Gulen, 2008 or Kelly and Clark, 2011). In
work subsequent to ours, Bondarenko and Muravyev (2020) replicate our finding that the lion’s
share of CTC equity futures returns are earned around the opening hours of European markets.
In the cross-section, Heston, Korajczyk, and Sadka (2010) study high frequency periodicity in
firm level returns documenting persistent intraday return reversals, which the authors argue arise
because investors have predictable demand for immediacy at certain points within the day. Lou,
Polk, and Skouras (2017) document firm level reversal patterns between intraday and overnight
returns: overnight (intraday) returns predict subsequent overnight (intraday) returns positively,
while overnight (intraday) returns predict subsequent intraday (overnight) returns negatively. The
authors link this pattern to a ‘tug of war’ between retail investors trading at the beginning of the
day and institutional investors who trade at the end of the day. Bogousslavsky (2018), on the other
hand, studies institutional constraints and a cross-section of intraday pricing anomalies.
Finally, we motivate our empirical design from a literature that studies demand for immediacy
and inventory risk (Grossman and Miller, 1988; Vayanos, 2001; Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009;
Rostek and Weretka, 2015). A common prediction of these models links price reversals to temporary
order imbalances absorbed by liquidity providers. 9 Indeed, the Duffie (2010) presidential address
reviews price dynamics with ‘slow-moving’ capital and highlights that ‘Even in markets that are
extremely active, price dynamics reflect slow capital when viewed from a high-frequency perspective.’
8See, for example, www.ft.com/content/e64bd276-c58f-441e-8cea-dccf58bbf46f
9For a textbook treatment we refer the reader to Foucault, Pagano, and R¨ oell (2013).
5
=== PAGE 8 ===
I. Data
Our primary focus is data on intraday trades and quotes for S&P 500 futures contracts traded on
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). The initial S&P 500 futures contract was introduced by
the CME in 1982, trading both by open outcry and electronically during U.S. regular trading hours
concurrently with the cash market. 10 This ‘big’ futures contract (henceforth SP ) was originally
quoted with a multiplier of $500 per unit of underlying, so that if the index trades, for example, at
$500, the value of the SP contract is $250,000. As the index level rose over time, the SP contract
became expensive to trade at this multiplier and the contract multiplier was cut to $250 times the
index on November 3, 1997. 11 In September 1993, the SP contract began trading electronically
outside regular hours via the CME GLOBEX electronic trading platform. The S&P 500 e-mini
futures contract (henceforth ES ) was introduced on September 9, 1997 and is quoted at fifty times
the index, i.e. one-fifth of the big SP contract. The ‘e’ in e-mini is for electronic as trading takes
place only on the CME GLOBEX platform which facilitates global trade for (almost) 24-hours
a day, 5-days a week. The two futures contracts have quarterly expiries on the third Thursday
in March, June, September and December. The most traded contract is almost always the front
contract (the contract closest to expiry). Only when the front contract is close to expiry is the back
contract (the contract second closest to expiry) more traded. This is because market participants
roll their positions in advance of the expiry. We always use the most traded contract.
Exact trading times on CME platforms have changed over time but today trades are executed
continuously from Sunday (18:00) – Friday (17:00), with a daily maintenance as of 2020 between
17:00 and 18:00. 12
Our primary data source exploits tick-by-tick data on trades and quotes for the ES contract
from Refinitiv Datascope Select, which we complement with data obtained directly from the CME.13
The trades dataset includes the trade price, trade size and trade time. The quotes dataset includes
quote price, quote size and quote time, with the first five levels of the order book available at all
10Regular trading hours are defined by the open outcry or pit session which trades between 9:30-16:15
11The minimum tick size was also cut to 0.25. See Karagozoglu, Martell, and Wang (2003) for a discussion on how this
change affected market liquidity and volatility.
12Between November 1994 and December 2012 the trading week began on Sunday at 18:30 and closed on Friday at 16:15.
The trading day (other than Sundays) ran from 18:00 one day to 17:30 the following day with maintenance break between
16:15 – 16:30. From December 2012 to December 2015 trading began half an hour earlier on Sundays (18:00) and closed
one hour later Fridays (17:15 ET). There was also a maintenance break from 23:00 to 00:00 on Tuesday through Friday from
October 1998 to September 2003.
13Refinitiv Datascope Select was formerly known as Thomson Reuters Tick History.
6
=== PAGE 9 ===
times. All trades and quotes are time-stamped to the millisecond, using Universal Time (UT). We
convert the UT timestamps to U.S. Eastern Time (ET), and define the intraday (ID ) and overnight
(ON ) trading sessions relative to the opening hours of the U.S. cash equity market. We identify the
direction of trades by comparing the trade price to the most recent quoted prices of the top level
in the limit order book: buy (sell) orders trade at the best available ask (bid) price. Our sample
period with 24 hour trading starts in January 1998 and ends in December 2020. 14 Market depth
for the first 5 levels of the order book is available since 2009.
Panel (a) of figure 1 displays within-the-month average daily trading volume for the SP and
ES contracts where the ES is further split by volumes within ON and ID trading sessions. We
measure volume as the total number of contracts traded in the most liquid contract, multiplying
the volume for the SP contract by 5 (10 prior to 1998) to make its volume comparable to the ES .
The figure shows that, since the advent of electronic trading, volume in the SP has trended down
over time. Instead, the trading volume in the ES (plotted in red for ON and blue for ID ) was
growing in the run up to the 2008 financial crisis, and thereafter stabilized at around 1-2 million
contracts traded per day. Turning to panel (b), we see that, while the annual volume traded ON
as a percentage of overall volume was small and constant at around 2% until the years 2002, it
increased somewhat linearly to around 15% in 2010 and remained flat until 2018. In 2018, with
the level of the index above 2000, using the index multiplier of 50, this implies $15 billion traded
daily during the overnight session. We also note that in the final years of our sample (2019 & 2020)
the share of overnight trading in the ES has again increased and stands at around 20% of total
volumes.
h
Insert figure 1
i
II. Returns around the clock
This section studies intraday returns computed from the most liquid e-mini contract, which is
almost always the front month contract, except in expiration months when contracts are rolled.
Returns are computed from mid quotes of best bid-offers. Our sample period spans January 5, 1998
– December 31, 2020 (23 years).
14Throughout the paper we use military time so that 2:00 corresponds to 2:00 a.m., and 16:30 corresponds to 4:30 p.m.
7
=== PAGE 10 ===
A. Main result
The n-th log return on day t is defined as
rN
t,n = pt, n
N
− pt, n−1
N
(1)
for n = 1 , . . . , N, where pt, n
N
denotes the log price at time n/N on day t and N is the number
of return observations throughout the day. n = 0 and n = N corresponds to 18:00 when a new
trading day begins as defined by the CME. We work interchangeably with hourly returns (N = 24),
15-minute returns (N = 96), 5-minute returns ( N = 288), and 1-minute returns ( N = 1440).15
The grey bars in figure 2 display hour-by-hour log returns and the black line depicts cumulative
5-minute log returns, averaged across all days in our sample. Estimates areannualized in percentage
points and show that ON returns are positive, on average, between the hours of 00:00 and 4:00.
Thirty minutes prior to the opening of the cash market at 9:30 equity returns are initially large and
negative and become smaller in magnitude but remain persistently negative until 12:00. We dub
negative return realizations between 9:00 – 10:00 ‘opening hour’ returns. The ID period is then
characterized by a flat return profile until 15:00, which is followed by a sequence of positive returns
that turn strongly negative after the maintenance break.
This overnight return pattern is surprising. The red line in figure 2 plots the cumulative average
return profile one would expect if information arrived continuously and returns accrued linearly,
which contrasts starkly to the realised return profile displayed in back. On average, the CT Clog
return is 5.9%, which is close to the average yearly log return on the S&P 500 index cash (excluding
dividends).16 More than half of this return is generated during the ON session: from 16:15 to 9:30
equity returns averaged 3.6% p.a. More striking than this, the return earned during the 2:00 to 3:00
hour averaged 3.7% p.a. We dub this return sequence the ‘overnight drift’ (OD). Figure 3 displays
a more granular view of returns around the OD. Here, we see a persistent sequence of positive
returns, which are clearly visible in almost every interval between 1:00 and 4:00, showing that the
positive average return between 2:00 and 3:00 is not driven by within-the-hour outliers but instead
represents a continuous drift over this interval of the overnight trading session.
What is special about this hour? Table II collects opening and closing times for 14 global
15Our last observation on Fridays is at 18:00. Our first observation on Sunday is at 18:01. Thus the weekend return is
incorporated into the first overnight return on Mondays.
16Standard equity futures contract do not give the owner the right to dividend claims.
8
=== PAGE 11 ===
equity markets, in the local time zone and in corresponding Eastern Time (ET). As U.S. regular
trading hours on GLOBEX close, New Zealand, Australia, Japan, Singapore and then China open
between 18:00 and 21:30. Day trading in these venues closes between 2:00 and 3:00, at which point
Dubai, Russia, London and Europe open. Thus, the OD coincides with the opening of regular
trading on Euronext, Eurex, and the Frankfurt Deutsche B¨ orse, as well as pre-market trading on
the London Stock Exchange, all occurring at 2:00. This observation highlights the geographical
nature of 24-hour trading and provides a first clue towards a potential explanation.
h
Insert figure 2 and 3 here
i
B. Summary statistics
Stacking hourly returns in the vector⃗ rand denoting by D a dummy matrix containing appropriately
located 0 and 1’s, we estimate the 1×24 vector of mean log returns µ via the projection ⃗ r= Dµ⊤ +ε.
Table I reports estimates for µ and t-statistics computed from HAC robust standard errors. We also
report p-values adjusted for multiple testing, medians, standard deviations, skewness and kurtosis
estimates.
Consider first panel (a) of table I which collects ON return statistics. Average returns for
the hours {24-01, 01-02, 02-03 } are equal to {0.46, 0.43, 1.5 } basis points per hour per day (bps)
with corresponding t-statistics equal to {2.8, 2.8, 7.1}, respectively. Due to the minimum tick size,
median returns computed from quotes are often zero during the night. However, even the median
quote return for the OD hour is large and positive equal to 0 .64 bps. 17 Consider now panel (b) of
table I which collects ID return statistics. The opening hour return is strongly negative, equal to
-1.2 bps with a t-statistic of 2.6, and the 17:00 – 18:00 return is equal to -0.43 bps with a t-statistic
of -3.6. The remaining ID returns are flat and statistically indistinguishable from zero.
Within the 24 sub-periods of the day, there is reasonably large variation in average returns
across hourly windows. Indeed, while the hours {24-01, 01-02, 02-03} are striking in both economic
and statistical terms, there are other windows which are statistically significant at the 10% level
over the full sample. This is to be expected since we are simultaneously testing more than one null
hypothesis, and it is well known that an appropriate significance level such as α = 0.05 is not valid
due to an inflated probability of committing a type I error. We account for the multiple testing
17The OA reports findings for returns computed from volume weighted average prices (VW APs) which are very close to
returns computed from quotes.
9
=== PAGE 12 ===
nature of our analysis in two ways.
First, we conduct a bootstrap exercise partitioning the day into 24 hourly sub-periods as in
table I. Distributions of test statistics are calculated using a block bootstrap (BS) sampling 10,000
times, with the optimal block length chosen following Patton, Politis, and White (2009). Panel
(a) of figure 4 plots the distribution of all hourly returns pooled together while panel (b) plots the
distribution of returns during 2:00 – 3:00. Dotted blue lines mark 95% confidence intervals. Black
dotted lines represent median estimates for specific hours. Each histogram is normalized such that
it represents a probability density function estimate, i.e., the sum of the bar areas is equal to 1.
In terms of economic magnitudes the OD return lies well above the upper 97.5% interval. More
striking, comparing panel (a) to panel (b), the lower 2.5% BS interval for the distribution of OD
estimates lies above the pooled 97.5% interval. Panel (c) repeats this exercise but plotting the
distribution of all hourly pooled t-statistics while panel (c) plots the distribution of t-statistics for
the OD hour. The conclusion here is the same: the statistical significance of the OD returns is
extreme compared to all other hours. Moreover, panels (a) and (c) are clearly bi-model, which is
due to unusually large returns realised between 2:00 – 3:00. Making this point clear, panels (e) and
(f) compute the equivalent test statistics to panels (a) and (c) after removing 2:00 – 3:00. In these
plots the second mode disappears further highlighting the unusual nature of the OD hour.
h
Insert table I and figure 4 here
i
Second, we account for multiple testing by using the Bonferroni (BF) correction to control the
family-wise error (FWER) and the Benjamini-Yekutieli (BY) procedure to control for the false
discovery rate (FDR). 18 Accounting for the multiple testing problem, we find that only the OD
hour and the 17:00 – 18:00 hour are significant, and this holds for both BF and BY methods. 19
More specifically, using the BF correction the significance level is adjusted to α/m where m = 24
hours is the number of tests. At the 5% level, the BF adjusted significance level is 0 .05/24 =
0.0021 and it is 0 .01/24 = 0 .00042 at the 1% level. With a p-value of 1 .1 · 10−12, the OD hour
is extremely statistically significant. The BY method is a ‘step up’ procedure that computes null
specific thresholds starting from the least significant hypothesis and working up until significant
18The FWER is the probability of making one or more type I errors. The FDR is the expected ratio of the number of type
I errors to the total number of rejections of the null. Harvey, Liu, and Saretto (2020) provides a recent survey of multiple
testing procedures in the context of financial economic applications.
19We note that between 1998 and 2012 trade was closed between 17:30 – 18:00 and in 2020 the maintenance break was moved
to 17:00 – 18:00. In the following we do not further investigate the 17:00 – 18:00 hour as it is of little economic importance.
Moreover, this hour is not significant when computing returns from trading prices instead of quotes (see table I in the OA).
10
=== PAGE 13 ===
alternative hypotheses are detected. The BY thresholds are reported in table A.4 (OA) at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels and shows that the OD hour is the only significant return hour at the 1% level.
In summary, the evidence presented so far demonstrates that 2:00 – 3:00 is a special hour of the
day, in both economic and statistical terms, and very far from what one should expect to see just
by luck.
C. Subsample Analysis and Persistence
In addition to concerns related to multiple testing one could also be suspicious that the “outper-
formance” of OD returns compared to other hours were sample specific or a result of data-mining.
A first simple test to address this concern splits the sample in two and recomputes figure 2
which is displayed in figure 5. Panel (a) considers the sample period January 1998 – December
2010 and in panel (b) the sample period is January 2011 – December 2020. One observes that the
overall pattern of 24 hour returns across subsamples is quite different. On the one hand, in the
first sample opening hour returns are large, negative and significant after accounting for multiple
testing using a BF adjustment (blue highlighted bars) but are slightly positive and insignificant in
the second sample period. On the other hand, returns between 17:00 – 18:00 are insignificant in
the first sample period but become significant in the second sample period. However, both samples
share the common characteristic that OD returns are large, positive, and significant at the 5%. 20
h
Insert figure 5 here
i
Second, a common approach used in the fund management literature to distinguish skill (out-
performance) from luck is to study persistence in funds α (see, e.g., Fama and French, 2021).
Analogously, figure 6 displays the cumulative log returns to a $1 initial investment that trades var-
ious sub-periods of the day. Panel (a) considers long positions in the hours {24-01, 01-02, 02-03 }
and panel (b) considers the cumulative returns that go short the opening and 17:00 – 18:00 hours
of the day.
A passive CT Cinvestment in e-mini futures (not shown) bears well known business cycle risk,
as evidenced by large negative returns in the aftermath of the dot-com bubble, the 2008 financial
crisis, and more recently during the early stages of the COVID pandemic. 21 By contrast, a $1
investment that holds e-mini futures for only one hour during the OD period would have returned
20Subsample statistics are reported in the OA.
21A $1 investment in e-mini futures CT Cwould have returned $3.8 by December 2020.
11
=== PAGE 14 ===
$2.4 by December 2020 and displays little variation (it is highly persistent). A $1 investment
trading either 24:00 – 1:00 or 1:00 – 2:00 would have yielded around half this value implying that
the OD accounts for 50% of the total return earned for holding e-mini futures over the extended
window 24:00 – 3:00.22 Panel (b) reveals that opening hour returns are persistently negative during
recessions or states of distress (2000-2003, 2007-2008, 2020) but are otherwise flat. Section B in the
OA also shows that opening hour return are only significantly negative on Thursdays and Fridays
suggesting they are due to a day of the week effect in bad states of the world. Returns between
17:00 – 18:00, on the other hand, are persistent but are smaller economically; comparable in size to
the returns earned between 24:00 – 1:00 and 1:00 – 2:00.
h
Insert figures 6 here
i
Examining the overnight session further, figure 7 examines average returns year-by-year for the
hours {24-01, 01-02, 02-03}.23 Panel (c) shows that OD returns were positive in 20 out of 23 years.
Interestingly, the largest yearly average OD return (10.7% p.a.) occurred in 2020, during the initial
year of the COVID pandemic. The OD is slightly negative in the recessionary years of 2002 and
2008, and again in 2019. The bottom panels report (1 − p) values from t-tests against the null of
zero. Panel (e) shows that, at the 10% level, the OD is significant in 17 out of 23 years. Splitting
the sample year-by-year highlights the statistical and economic consistency of 2:00 – 3:00 returns
compared to 12:00 – 1:00 or 1:00 – 2:00 returns. Indeed, while the two hours that precede the
regular opening hours in London are mostly positive, they are much smaller economically and are
rarely significant at conventional levels. Moreover, section B in the OA studies these findings along
a number of different dimensions and demonstrates that positive statistically significant average
returns during 2:00 – 3:00 are a systematic feature or the data, present on all days of the week and
9 out 12 months of the year.
While observing significant positive or negative return hours is certainly interesting, developing
a unified explanation for all hours of the day is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, we will
focus on the overnight return patterns straddling the opening of European markets, paying special
attention attention to 2:00 – 3:00, which in economic and statistical terms is the salient hour of the
day; thus allowing us to test theory driven hypotheses consistently over the entire sample.
h
Insert figure 7 here
i
22A detailed analysis of investment returns with and without transaction costs is delayed until section V.
23Figure A.5 in the OA reports year-by-year results for the hours 9:00 – 10:00 & 17:00–18:00.
12
=== PAGE 15 ===
III. Inventory management and price reversals
In the section, we study a potential explanation for the overnight return patterns documented
above. To help frame the discussion of the confluence of factors that can explain an asymmetric
overnight drift, it is helpful to start from the frictionless benchmark in, for example, Glosten and
Milgrom (1985). Glosten and Milgrom (1985) consider the bid and ask price setting problem of
a risk-neutral, zero-profit (competitive) market specialist (market maker) and show that, in the
absence of any frictions, such as inventory costs and asymmetric information, the bid price equals
the ask price and the expected return earned by the market maker is indeed 0. Phenomena like
the overnight drift – that is, high frequency price reversals with a non-zero unconditional mean –
must thus arise when one or more of the assumptions in the frictionless Glosten and Milgrom (1985)
benchmark case are violated.
The first strand of the market microstructure literature relaxes the assumption of no asymmetric
information (see e.g. Menkveld, 2016, for an overview). Glosten and Milgrom (1985) show that,
when risk-neutral, competitive market makers face informed traders, the optimal bid-ask spread
is not zero, and increases in the amount of information present in the market. Thus, for the
overnight drift to arise as a result of asymmetric information, news revelation to informed traders
has to systematically occur between the U.S. market close and the European market open – so that
market makers set a lower bid at U.S. market close and a higher ask at European market opens – and
the information revealed overnight has to be positive on average. In the Appendix, we show that
the overnight drift cannot be explained by standard information releases, including macroeconomic,
monetary policy and earnings announcements, suggesting that overnight information revelation is
an unlikely source of the overnight drift.
The second strand of literature focuses on the impact of market maker inventories (see e.g. Stoll,
1978; Amihud and Mendelson, 1980; Ho and Stoll, 1981, 1983; Mildenstein and Schleef, 1983; O’Hara
and Oldfield, 1986; Grossman and Miller, 1988; Shen and Starr, 2002) and the costs of maintaining
those inventories. This literature finds that, even in the absence of financing constraints on the part
of the market makers, market makers that either face non-linear costs (Amihud and Mendelson,
1980; Shen and Starr, 2002) or that are risk-averse (O’Hara and Oldfield, 1986) set bid-ask spreads
in a way that reflects their inventory positions. In such models, the setting of the bid and the ask
prices depend on both contemporaneous demand and supply and on the future expected value of the
13
=== PAGE 16 ===
security. Price reversals can thus arise in models of inventory (risk) management due to variation
in either order imbalances over time or in expectations of future value of the security (information
revelation).
Finally, most recently, the market microstructure literature has studied the link between funding
liquidity – that is, how constrained market makers are in funding their inventories – and market
liquidity provision. Gromb and Vayanos (2002); Weill (2007); Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005);
Attari, Mello, and Ruckes (2005); Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) feature models in which
capital-constrained market makers (or market makers with costly capital) undersupply market liq-
uidity, leading to time-variation in market returns due to order imbalances, fundamental information
revelation and market maker capital constraints. Given the implausibility of information revela-
tion alone as the source of the overnight drift, in this Section, we focus on the implications of the
inventory risk-management based models for market microstructure.
More concretely, consider the following stylized example. News is announced during the U.S. in-
traday trading session that results in selling pressure at market close. Orders transact at the best
available bids and, consequently, execute at successively lower prices down the order book. As the
sell-off unfolds, prices drop below fundamental values because risk-averse market makers bear in-
ventory risk. Market makers are compensated for bearing that risk through high expected returns,
earned when they offload their excess inventory to new customers arriving overnight.
Grossman and Miller (1988) (GM) provides a framework that models such ‘liquidity events’
through the supply and demand for immediacy. In GM, buyers and sellers arrive at different points
in the trading day, which generates transient imbalances between buy and sell volumes. Market
makers offer immediacy to incoming traders by absorbing order imbalances and subsequently trading
them away. In our context, compensation for bearing inventory risk (a liquidity premium) is earned
through expected returns for offloading positions to new customers arriving overnight, i.e., prices
drop from S0 to S1 as the market sells off intraday and rebounds from S1 to S2 as trading begins
in overseas timezones. Defining the overnight return as RON = (S2 − S1)/S1, conditional expected
returns based on date t = 1 information are given by
E [RON |F1] = Dollar OrderImbalance × ReturnVariance ×
Risk Bearing
Capacity
−1
(2)
Models of the GM type provide an intuitive link between liquidity provision, demand for immediacy
and price formation. The basic prediction of GM-type models is that the expected returns to
14
=== PAGE 17 ===
providing immediacy are higher when (1) order imbalances are larger; (2) when payoffs are more
uncertain; (3) when the total risk bearing capacity of market makers is lower. In the following, we
study our proposed explanation by testing these predictions.
A. End-of-day Volumes
To motivate an inventory management explanation, consider figure 8 which displays intraday and
overnight trading volume patterns. To account for an increasing trend in trade over time, for each
day we compute the volume in every 5 minute interval weighted by the average volume that occurred
in a 5 minute interval on that day. A number above ‘1’ means there is more volume during a given
5 minute interval compared to the daily average and vice-versa for a number below ‘1’. Panel
(a) shows that most trade occurs around the opening and close of the U.S. cash market. Panel
(b) zooms in on the overnight session revealing three U-shaped patterns: between 18:00 and 2:00
(Asia), between 2:00 and 3:00 (European opening), and between 3:00 and 8:30 which coincides with
scheduled U.S. macro announcements.
Quantifying intraday magnitudes in the recent sample, panels (c) plots average volumes for all
hours of the day during 2020. With the index level at 3000 (late May & early June) closing volume
in the 5 minute interval 16:10 - 16:15 averaged 85000 × 50 × 3000 ∼ 13 billion USD. By comparison,
panel (d) zooms in on the overnight hours showing that volumes are an order of magnitude smaller.
Cumulative volumes in the 8 hour period between 18:00 and 3:00 total 13500 × 50 × 3000 ∼ 2
billion USD so that, even in 2020, overnight trading represents a small fraction of the volume in
the 5-minute interval preceding the maintenance break.
The key take-away from figure 8 is that there is an economically large downward jump in intraday
volume at U.S. close and that overnight trading activity is between 50 to 100 times lower compared
to the U.S. trading hours. From an inventory management perspective this makes order imbalances
at close particularly risky since the extreme trading volumes leading up to U.S. close at 16.15 can
generate large inventory imbalances. Such imbalances cannot be immediately traded away when the
overnight session starts at 18:00 because the overnight trading activity is much lower. Moreover,
even in recent years, order imbalances can last most of the overnight period and cannot be resolved
until European trading begins.

Insert figure 8 here

15
=== PAGE 18 ===
B. Volume Time
In the previous section, we showed that returns earned during the OD hour account for the bulk of
total overnight returns and argued that this pattern is inconsistent with returns accruing linearly
over time. Instead, the high returns earned during the OD hour is in line with the basic idea
of GM-style models, which imply that, conditional on an order imbalance, prices revert as new
participants arrive and market makers offload their inventories. In clock-time, the speed of mean
reversion depends on the volume of new participants because market makers cannot manage inven-
tory imbalances when trading activity is low. Conversely, when trading activity is high, markets
markers can offload quickly.
In this context, a natural alternative to clock time is to measure time elapsed in terms of the
trading volume as first proposed by Mandelbrot and Taylor (1967). 24 Specifically, we consider
volume time , which advances one increment for every contract traded and thus equals cumulative
trading volume. Volume time is a type of activity time , like tick time, advancing slowly when few
contracts are traded (Asian hours) and quickly when many contracts are traded (U.S. hours). By
definition, trade activity is constant in volume time and we therefore expect order imbalances to
revert linearly to zero in volume time. Thus, we also expect price reversals induced by inventory
management to be linear when measured in volume time.
From the perspective of inventory risk models, the empirical measure of order imbalance would
be net inventory held by market makers. As these are not observable, we proxy for them from
signed volume defined as
SV i
t = #buy orders − #sell orders , (3)
where # of orders is defined as the number of contracts, t is the day, and i is the period during the
day. Note that SV i
t is measured in dollar units consistent with equation 2, and the sample period
is 2007–2020 since total volume was relatively stationary during this period (see figure 1). Table
A.7 of the OA shows the intraday properties of SV i
t while panels (a) and (b) of figure A.6 show the
distribution and time series of SV i
t at U.S. close.
Figure 9 displays cumulative log returns (computed from VW APS) and cumulative signed volume
in both clock time and volume time, sorted by SV close
t , which is the signed volume measured in the
24Mandelbrot and Taylor (1967) argue that price changes follow a Pareto distribution in clock time but are normally
distributed in volume time. This result was later generalized by An´ e and Geman (2000). More recently, Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2016) propose and test “market microstructure invariance”, which states that the distributions of risk transfers and transaction
costs are constant across assets when measured in business-time (activity time).
16
=== PAGE 19 ===
last hour before the maintenance break between 15:15–16:15. Panel (a) and (c) are in clock time
and we clearly see that price reversals are strongest at the opening of Asian (19:00 and 20:00) and
European markets (2:00 and 3:00 ET) when volume jumps up, and that returns quickly flatten off
after the initial hours of European trade. Panel (b) and (d) are in volume time. Following negative
(positive) closing order imbalances, both signed volume and returns increase (decrease) essentially
monotonically. Following market sell-offs, most of the overnight return is earned by the point 60,000
contracts are traded, or in other words, around the time when European markets open.
Corresponding positive closing order imbalances generate a smaller price impact than negative
closing order imbalances, even if order flow is quite symmetric following positive versus negative
end-of-day imbalances. Thus, viewed from the perspective of volume time, we observe an almost
linear but asymmetric demand shock response throughout Asian and European hours.

Insert figure 9 here

C. Economic Magnitudes
Next, we evaluate the quantitative plausibility of an inventory risk hypothesis. From the data,
we can observe three of the four terms that enter equation 2: the expected overnight returns
E [RON |F1], the end-of-day dollar order imbalance, and the (conditional) return variance. The final
component – the risk-bearing capacity of the market is harder to observe directly. Instead, we note
that the risk bearing capacity can be expressed as
Risk Bearing
Capacity

= N +1
ARA where N is the number
of market makers providing immediacy and ARA is absolute risk aversion common across market
makers. Recall further that the coefficient of relative risk aversion (RRA) is approximately the
ARA multiplied by wealth, which allows us to re-cast equation 2 as a prediction for the RRA of
the market makers in this market
RRA = E [RON |F1]
Dollar OrderImbalance × ReturnVariance
× Wealth (4)
where Wealth denotes total capital of the market makers, ( N + 1) × Wealthi, that is allocated to
supporting equity market trades. While market participants’ capital allocations to particular trades
are notoriously hard to measure, we can follow the literature on financial intermediation (see e.g.
Adrian and Shin, 2014b) by proxying for Wealth and proxy with the equity value-at-risk (VaR) of
17
=== PAGE 20 ===
large dealers. 25 The total equity VaR of large dealers proxies for how much capital is at risk for
these intermediaries when they provide liquidity in equity markets, and is thus closely related to
the total risk bearing capacity of market makers in the market. 26
We obtain the quarterly time series of average broker-dealer equity VaR from Bloomberg in
order to perform a proxy calculation of implied market maker RRA. Figure A.9 in the OA shows
the time-series of equity VaR varies between 50 and 750 billion USD between 2000.Q1 and 2020.Q4,
peaking in the financial crisis and rising again during the COVID-19 crisis. Average equity VaR
during the sample period 2007Q1 – 2020Q4 was equal to 300 billion USD, which we take as our proxy
for Wealth. Then, from panel (b) of figure 9, we take the realized overnight return, measured in
volume time, equal to ∼ 17% p.a. as a proxy for expected overnight returns conditional on a market
sell-off. From panel (d) of figure 9 we obtain the corresponding resolved overnight market maker
imbalance of ∼ 1500 contracts that, with the index level at 2000, equates to a dollar imbalance
of 1500 × 50 × 2000 = 150 billion USD. We measure

ReturnVariance

as the unconditional level of the
V IX2 in our sample, which was 20% 2. The implied market maker relative risk aversion is therefore
RRA = 0.17
150 × 0.04 × 300 = 8.5 (5)
To put this estimate in context, Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) perform a similar conversion of
Treasury arbitrageurs’ ARA to RRA to estimate a range of [7.6, 91.2] for the RRA. For mortgage
backed security arbitrageurs Malkhozov, Mueller, Vedolin, and Venter (2016) peform a similar
calculation coming up with an estimate of 88. Our ‘back-of-the-envelope’ calculation suggests that,
not only is an inventory risk explanation plausible from a qualitative perspective, but also from a
quantitative one.27
25At the end of 2020, the five largest dealer banks were Bank of America, Citibank, JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs, and
Morgan Stanley. As in Adrian and Shin (2014a), for firms which report VaRs at the 95% confidence level, we scale the VaR
to the 99% using the Gaussian assumption.
26We discuss in the OA the assumptions behind using equity value-at-risk as a proxy for dealer capital committed to equity
futures trades.
27Prior empirical literature has also studied the plausibility of inventory risk explanations though in more limited settings.
Madhavan and Smidt (1993); Hansch, Naik, and Viswanathan (1998); Ready, Roussanov, and Ward (2013); Naik and Yadav
(2003) find, in small samples of intraday data, that market makers control risk by mean-reverting their inventory positions
toward target levels. Using 11 years of daily data on NYSE specialist inventory positions and trading revenue, Comerton-Forde,
Hendershott, Jones, Moulton, and Seasholes (2010) test directly for the relationship between funding and market liquidity
and find that both aggregate market-level and specialist firm-level spreads widen when specialists have large positions or lose
money. They further document that, consistent with models of time-varying risk-bearing capacity, these effects are non-linear.
18
=== PAGE 21 ===
D. End-of-day Order Imbalance
We now study in more detail the prediction of GM-type models which states that returns for
providing immediacy should be higher when order imbalances are larger. In order to exploit as
much data as possible, and following much of the empirical literature, our main proxy for order
imbalance in the remaining is relative signed volume, measured as signed volume over total volume
RSV i
t = SV i
t
T Vi
t
∈ [−1, 1], (6)
where T Vi
t = #buy orders + #sell orders accounts for the increasing trend in total trading volume
over the sample 1998–2020. 28
Table III reports summary statistics for hourly RSV t. On average, close-to-close RSV t is equal
to −2.4% and is highly volatile. Negative CT C RSVt’s are consistent with the idea that the futures
market is traded as a hedging instrument for the underlying. However, while RSV t’s are negative
during the day, they are largely positive between 1:00 – 4:00. During the OD hour, average RSV t
is 2.4% with a t-statistic of 6.7, mirroring the unconditional positive returns during this hour. In
the following, we use the last hour preceding the maintenance (15:15 – 16:15) to measure closing
order imbalance, which we denote RSV close
t .29

Insert table III here

Figure 10 sorts all trading days into groups based on closing imbalances. For each group panel (a)
reports returns during Asian hours (18:00 – 1:00), (b) reports returns during EU open (1:00 – 04:00),
panels (c) & (d) report returns during the OD hour (2:00 – 3:00). The sorting is performed such
that the groups are approximately equal in size and black bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. 30
Summarising, figure 10 shows that ( i) order imbalances at U.S. close are followed by overnight
price reversals as predicted by inventory models; and (ii) price reversals are much stronger following
market sell-offs giving rise to an unconditional positive overnight drift.
28In the OA, we present counterparts to all of the results that follow using SVt as alternative measure of imbalance (for
the sample 2007–2020 as above). The results are quantitatively similar using either measure and thus robust to whether we
standardize by volume or not.
29Panel (c) and (d) of figure A.6 show the distribution and time series of RSV at U.S. close. RSV close
t is stationary around
zero throughout the sample period and its variance is stable.
30Note that RSV close
t is defined as buys minus sells so that a negative imbalance implies dealers are long and from equation
2 overnight expected returns should therefore be positive.
19
=== PAGE 22 ===
Using RSV close
t as a sorting variable the conditional return pattern resembles a step function
centered around zero. Figure A.7 in the OA shows that, when sorting on SV close
t , the conditional
return pattern in monotonic, albeit with an asymmetric slope. More importantly, in both cases,
negative closing imbalances generate statistically significant positive overnight returns.

Insert figure 10 here

Equation 2 contains an additional intuitive prediction that order imbalances close to zero should
have little price impact. Indeed, market makers should not require liquidity premium for holding
zero inventory. Panel (d) examines this prediction by zooming in onOD returns based on RSV close
t
straddling zero. Consistent with an inventory channel, when closing imbalances are approximately
zero we find reversal returns which are economically small and statistically indistinguishable from
zero.
E. Volatility risk
The second prediction of equation 2 is that expected overnight returns are increasing in the return
variance of the risky asset. This is because risk-averse market makers demand a higher premium
for holding larger price risk. To allow for differential effects on volatility due to demand shock
asymmetry, we split the sample into positive and negative closing order imbalance days and then
construct double sorts – based on terciles of RSV and volatility – within each sub-sample. Panel a
(panel b) of table IV reports double sorts conditional on negative (positive) RSV close
t days. Double
sorted return averages are reported based on terciles of RSV close
t and the closing level of the VIX
sampled at 16:15 each day. 31 Within each set, we also report average RSV close
t and VIX levels
(A1, A2, B1, B2). Double sorted OD return averages are reported ( A3, B3) along with high minus
low differences and p-values testing the difference against zero.
We first note that the distribution of EOD VIX appears quite symmetric conditional on positive
versus negative RSV close
t days. Thus, it is unlikely that asymmetric price impact is due to a
correlation between order imbalance and the level of asset return variance. 32 Considering panel (a)
(positive RSV close
t ) there is really no clear pattern is 3 × 3 sorted OD return averages. Panel (b)
(negative RSV close
t ) on the other hand is consistent with our priors from equation 2: (i) Conditional
31Tick-by-tick quotes for the VIX index are sourced from Refinitiv and complemented with data from CBOE.
32While changes in the VIX are highly negatively correlated with returns, the correlation between the level of the VIX and
returns (order imbalance) is quite low.
20
=== PAGE 23 ===
on the level of the VIX, moving from low to high RSV close
t states, the OD return averages are
increasing. (ii) Conditional on the level of the RSV close
t , moving from low to high RSV close
t
states, the OD return averages are also increasing. The only exception is in high VIX states where
the impact of RSV close
t is large but flat. Moreover, the high-minus-low return spreads are in the
anticipated direction and statistically significant in 5 out of 6 cases. Thus, as predicted by GM-style
models, price reversals are larger following days with large end-of-day order imbalances and even
more so if the large order imbalances coincide with periods of heightened uncertainty.

Insert table IV here

F. Demand Shock Asymmetry
Consistent with the literature on downward sloping demand curves and imperfect liquidity provision,
we have shown that demand shocks have a temporary price impact that reverts over time. However,
we have also shown a strong asymmetry in price impact in response to positive versus negative
demand shocks. This asymmetry generates a positive unconditional overnight return which in clock
time is concentrated in the hour from 2:00 – 3:00 (the OD). In Section III.B we then showed
that re-cast in volume time, that demand shock asymmetry is a more general feature of the data
observable throughout Asian and European hours.
To the best of our knowledge, such an asymmetry is novel to the literature. Now, recall from
2 that the conditional expected return to providing immediacy is the product of three terms: the
end-of-day order imbalance, conditional variance of returns, and the inverse of the risk-bearing
capacity of the market makers. Table IV shows that the first two terms are unlikely to contribute
to the asymmetric response to positive and negative demand shocks: the distribution of demand
shocks around ‘0’ is roughly symmetric and the distribution of the VIX conditional on the sign of
the demand shock is roughly similar. Instead, the asymmetric response to positive and negative
demand shocks may be driven by contemporaneous changes in the risk-bearing capacity of the
market makers. This may arise through two different channels.
First, since there are no designated market makers for e-mini contracts, there is no obligation
on the part of institutions that normally act as market makers to continue doing so in the face of
large sell-offs. That is, during large sell-offs, institutions that act as market makers may choose to
exit the market, reducing the total risk-bearing capacity of the market maker segment.
21
=== PAGE 24 ===
Second, those market makers that choose to remain during large sell-offs may reduce their
individual risk limits in response to deteriorating market conditions. Section A.3 in the OA outlines
how increases in volatility, which accompany market sell-offs, may translate into higher effective risk
aversion when market makers face value-at-risk (VaR) constraints. Increases in volatility tighten
the VaR constraint for market makers, translating into higher effective risk aversion. Conversely
decreases in volatility do not translate into lower effective risk aversion once the VaR constraint is
no longer binding. Thus, an asymmetry in the pass through of positive versus negative volatility
shocks can generate an asymmetry in return reversals following demand shocks.
Third, market makers may face an asymmetry in funding costs as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen
(2009) who argue that decreases in risk-bearing capacity arise when market liquidity and funding
liquidity interact in flight-to-quality episodes, with capital required for trading evaporating when
market returns are negative. Indeed, during prolonged periods of market sell-offs, the CME increases
the required initial margins for futures positions.
Each of these mechanisms may contribute to time-variation in effective risk aversion; we leave
further investigation of return reversal asymmetry for future research.
IV. High frequency return predictability
Section II documented our central empirical finding and section III adopted a sorting based approach
to test our explanation. In this section, we study further the link between overnight expected returns
and EOD order imbalances within a high frequency predictability framework.
A. High Frequency Predictability and Order Imbalance
Panel (a) of table V reports point estimates from univariate regressions of hourly realised returns
during the overnight session (18:00 – 6:00) on closing imbalances:
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + ϵt,n, for n = 1, . . . ,12, (7)
together with t-statistics computed from robust standard errors clustered within each month. Re-
turns are measured in basis points, and RSV close
t−1 ∈ [−1, 1]. Thus, a point estimate of βRSV
n = −10
implies a +1 basis point return response to a closing imbalance of RSV close
t−1 = −10%.
Consistent with an explanation based on inventory risk, we observe a strong negative relation
22
=== PAGE 25 ===
between the closing order imbalance and returns. The relation is strongest between 2:00 – 4:00.
The estimates are both economically and statistically significant. A 1-standard deviation (6.55%)
decrease in RSV close
t−1 (a sell-off) induces a 6 .55% · −17.49 = 1 .15 basis point increase in returns
between 2:00 – 3:00. We also observe a statistically significant negative relationship between 20:00
– 21:00, corresponding to the opening of Japanese (TSE) and Australian (ASX) markets.
In panel (b) of Table V, we verify that order imbalance in the last hour of the U.S. trading day
is the appropriate proxy for dealer inventory imbalances. We include order imbalances measured in
the final three hours of the trading day (13:15–14:15, 14:15 – 15:15, and 15:15 – 16:15) as separate
regressors in a multivariate extension to equation 7. Given the high levels of trading activity during
U.S. open hours, we expect order imbalances from earlier in the day to have been traded away prior
to the end of the trading day and thus have no impact on overnight returns. This is indeed what
is suggested by the estimates in Table V. For example, focusing on the 2:00 – 3:00 interval, the
point estimates monotonically decline the earlier in the day the order imbalance is measured and
are insignificant beyond 14:15.

Insert table V here

B. Falsification Test
Microstructure theory predicts a link between order imbalance and returns, both contemporaneously
and at lagged intervals. In inventory management models, high-frequency predictability arises as
market makers adjust their quotes to resolve imbalances. The more liquid a market is, the shorter
the period of predictability will be because market makers can quickly trade imbalances away. In
illiquid markets such as corporate bonds predictability can last several days. Microstructure theory
also predicts negative autocorrelation in returns due to a host market frictions and, indeed we do
observe negatively autocorrelated returns for the e-mini but the generally large liquidity of the
market implies autocorrelation coefficients only are significant for, at most, 30 minutes. 33 However,
the closing of U.S. trading hours is a special point in the trading day because volume is extremely
high relative to the subsequent trading hours.
Our proposed explanation relies on a special relationship between closing order imbalance and
returns around European open. Table VI provides a ‘falsification’ test for this claim. For the
33See figure A.8 in the OA.
23
=== PAGE 26 ===
overnight hours, panel (a) estimates univariate regressions of hourly returns on one hour lagged
RSV t. There is only one significant hour between 23:00 – 24:00 and the sign is positive not negative.
Panel (b) extends the regression to include the previous 12 lagged hours of RSV t for the night
hours. Most of the point estimates in the table are insignificant. However, focusing on the high-
lighted purple diagonal estimates we find economically large and statistically significant return
predictability arising from order imbalances at close of regular U.S. trading hours. More specifi-
cally, the point estimates are large at exactly the opening of Tokyo and European regular market
opening times, even after controlling for all imbalances subsequent to U.S. close.

Insert table VI here

C. Demand Asymmetry and Volatility Risk
The sorting based approach of the previous section revealed a strong asymmetry in price impact
in response to positive vs. negative demand shocks, which generates an unconditional positive
overnight drift return (reversal) . Panel (a) of table VII explores the asymmetry in a regression
design that interacts RSV close
t with a dummy variable that takes on a value of ‘1’ if RSV close
t−1 < 0
and ‘0’ otherwise
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + βN EG
n 1 N EG,t+ βRSV ×N EG
n RSV t−1,close × 1 N EG,t+ εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12.
We find that the dummy variable is large and statistically significant during only the OD hour.
We also investigate the standard inventory risk prediction that price reversals should be amplified
in states of high volatility. Testing this, we interact RSV close
t with the level of the VIX index
sampled at 16:15 ET
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + βV IX
n V IXclose
t−1 + βRSV ×V IX
n RSV close
t−1 × V IXclose
t−1 + ϵt,n (8)
for n = 1, ...,12. Panel (b) of Table VII reports the estimates, showing that ex-ante volatility has
a strong amplification effect on the relationship between order imbalance and overnight returns
between 2:00 – 3:00. A 1-standard deviation decrease in RSV close
t−1 when V IXclose
t−1 = 20% (the
average VIX level throughout the sample period is 19 .8%) generates a return response of 66 .39 ×
(−6.55%) − 5.33 × (−6.55%) × 20 = 2 .6 basis points. With the VIX at its 90th percentile (30%)
24
=== PAGE 27 ===
the return response is 6.1 basis points and with the VIX at its 10th percentile (12 %) there is close
to zero effect.

Insert table VII here

D. Daylight savings tests
The results so far highlight that large negative order imbalances at the end of the U.S. trading
are subsequently resolved during the overnight trading session, as new customers arrive into the
market. The 24-hour nature of the e-mini market allows us to provide additional evidence on this
explanation by conducting a novel test that exploits exogenous variation, from the perspective of
U.S.-based market makers, in the arrival time of Asia-based clients. Specifically, we exploit the
fact that while both U.S. and Europe observe daylight savings time (DST), Japan does not. From
the perspective of U.S.-based market makers, clients based in Japan arrive at 19:00 during U.S.
winter months (DST off) and at 20:00 during U.S. summer months (DST on). Thus, DST changes
represents exogenous variation in the arrival time of Japan-based clients.
Figure 11 shows that, during the second half of our sample (January 2007 – December 2020),
when the trading volume during Asian opening hours is non-negligible, there is a spike in e-mini
trading volume at 21:00 when DST is not active (red line) which is exactly at the opening of the
Tokyo stock exchange (TSE). When DST is active, the increase in volume occurs instead at 20:00,
which again corresponds to the opening of TSE in the U.S. summer. Notice, also, a secondary spike
in trading volume at 22:30 when the TSE re-opens after its lunch break during U.S. winter months
and at 23:30 when the TSE re-opens after the lunch break during the U.S. summer months. 34

Insert figure 11 here

We now test more formally whether changes in the arrival time of Asia-based clients translates
into a change in the timing of overnight returns. Panel (a) of table VIII reports the estimated
coefficients from a regression of hourly overnight returns between 18:00 – 23:00, measured in basis
points, on order flow imbalance at the end of the preceding trading day, a dummy for U.S. DST,
and an interaction between the two
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV t−1,close + βDST
n 1 DST,t + βRSV ×DST
n RSV t−1,close × 1 DST,t + εt,n (9)
34For an in-depth discussion of the TSE lunch break and its effects on trading on the NIKKEI, see Lucca and Shachar
(2014).
25
=== PAGE 28 ===
for n = 1, . . . ,12, where the dummy variable takes on a value of 1 in summer time (DST active)
and 0 in winter time (DST not active), with daylight savings seen from a U.S. perspective. The
sample period is 1998.1 – 2020.12.
Consistent with the hypothesis that DST creates exogenous variation in the arrival time of Asia-
based clients, we see that the effect of RSV moves forward by one hour when the U.S. goes from
winter to summer time. To see this, consider first U.S. winter time where the DST dummy equals 0.
Here, Australia opens at 18:00, TSE opens at 19:00, and Singapore opens at 20:00 (also, Shanghai
opens at 20:15 and Hong Kong opens at 20:30). As expected, the effect of RSV negative in hours
with market openings where new agents arrive. specifically, βSRV
n = {−9.34; −13.46; −6.70} for the
hours 18:00 – 19:00, 19 – 20:00 and 20:00 – 21:00.
Next, in U.S. summer time, where the DST dummy equals 1, there are no major market openings
at 18:00, TSE opens at 20:00, Australia opens at 19:00 or 20:00, and Singapore opens at 21:00. 35
Now, we find the effect of RSV by summing βRSV
n + βRSV ×DST
n = {1.43; −1.43; −6.85} and, indeed,
we see that the effect of RSV shifts in accordance with DST.
We can likewise exploit the fact that DST is observed both in Europe and the U.S. The standard
time difference between New York and London is five hours but throughout our sample period the
U.S. and Europe have switched to DST at different times, typically 1 week apart. Panel (b) of table
VIII reports estimates of hourly overnight returns between 24:00 – 5:00 regressed on closing signed
volume and a time difference dummy:
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + βDIF F
n 1 DIF F,t+ βRSV ×DIF F
n RSV t−1,close × 1 DIF F,t+ εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12,
where the dummy variable takes on a value of ‘0’ when the time difference between London and New
York is 5 hours and a value of ‘1’ when the time difference is 4 hours. We find that the predictability
of RSV disappear in the hour 2:00 – 3:00 on days where the U.S. - EU time difference only is four
hours. Predictability due to an overnight return reversal shifts by two hours to 4:00 – 5:00, which
is the first hour of regular trading in London and Frankfurt when the U.S. - EU time difference is 4
hours. We note that there are less than 300 trading days here; thus, the point estimate is not well
measured. However, the main takeaway of the European daylight savings test remains: when the
U.S. and Europe are out of their usual 5 hour time-difference synchronization, consistent with idea
35Australia does not switch to winter (summer) time at exactly the same date where the U.S. switches to summer (winter)
time. Therefore, seen from a U.S. perspective, Australia opens at 19:00 for short periods during the spring and fall.
26
=== PAGE 29 ===
that liquidity traders are no longer entering the market at this time, predictability during the OD
hour disappears.

Insert table VIII here

V. Trading overnight reversals
We conclude the paper by considering a set of trading strategies designed to exploit overnight
price reversals, with and without transaction costs, and in doing so implicitly study how market
makers set liquidity premiums in response to inventory shocks. The trading strategies we consider
are stylized examples that expose an investor to holding the ES contract for a sub-period of each
trading day compared to passively holding the ES contract. Returns on trading day j earned on a
strategy that goes long the ES contract in the sub-period [ t1, t2] are computed as
RL
j,[t1,t2] = Pj,t2 − Pj,t1
Pj,t1
, (10)
where P denotes price of the ES contract. The analogous short position earns RS = −RL. Mid
quotes are used to compute returns excluding transaction costs. Transaction costs are incorporated
from bid-ask quotes in Refinitiv data and returns are computed from quotes as
RL
j,[t1,t2] = P bid
j,t2 − P ask
j,t1
P ask
j,t1
, R S
j,[t1,t2] = −1 × P ask
j,t2 − P bid
j,t1
P bid
j,t1
. (11)
We consider the following strategies:
• long CT C: t1=16:15 → t2 = 16:15;
• long CT O: t1 = 16:15 → t2 = 9:30;
• long OT C: t1 = 9:30 → t2 = 16:15;
• long OD: t1 = 2:00 → t2 = 3:00;
• long OD+: t1 = 1:30 → t2 = 3:30
We also consider a conditional trading strategy that ‘buys-the-dip’, denoted BtD, which holds
the e-mini during the OD+ period but only on trading days following a negative order flow at
market close ( RSV close
t−1 < 0). We report findings for the sample period 2004.1 — 2020.12, as after
this point the bid-ask spread during the overnight period reached its minimum tick size (see figure
A.13).
27
=== PAGE 30 ===
Table IX (a) reports summary statistics of the trading strategies when transaction costs are
excluded. Holding the ES contract continuously (the CT Cstrategy) since 2004.1 has yielded an
average yearly return of 8.9% with a Sharpe ratio of 0.42. 36 The beta is equal to 1 by definition as
we use the CT Creturn as a proxy for the market return. CT Oand OT Creturns contributed an
approximately equal proportion to the total return earned by a passive investor holding the index:
On an annualized basis, CT Oreturns averaged 4.6% and OT Creturns averaged 4.2%. A dissection
of this magnitude is not particularly surprising in itself. However, it is surprising that OD return
component is comparable in size to the CT Oand OT Creturns, equal to 3 .8% on average. The
OD strategy has a Sharpe ratio of 1.1, which outperforms the market Sharpe ratio, and arises
from a combination of high excess returns and low volatility during the overnight drift period. The
best performing strategy is the conditional versions of OD+ which holds the e-mini on ∼ 50% of
trading days. Returns from trading the BtD strategy are considerable larger than OD+ returns,
which we interpret as additional evidence in support of the inventory risk prediction that past RSV
should predict subsequently higher expected returns, as new agents arrive to market and liquidity
suppliers offload their long positions. In addition to larger returns, the BtD strategy return variance
is significantly lower and thereby the Sharpe ratio higher. Specifically, RSV close
t−1 < 0 has a Sharpe
ratio of 1.8 compared to 1.3 of OD+37.
Table IX (b) reports summary statistics post transaction costs. Returns on all simple strategies
are significantly lower and only the OD+ strategy has a positive Sharpe ratio. However, the BtD
strategy remains highly profitable (Sharpe ratio of 1.1) because it only pays the bid-ask spread
on half the trading days when returns are higher. This is exactly what we would expect from an
inventory management perspective. Market makers earn the bid-ask spread, buying at the bid on
negative closing RSV days and selling at the ask during the overnight trading session. In general,
market makers position their limit order books to incentivize trades that bring their inventory closer
to their targets, making a contrarian trade – where a client would earn the bid-ask spread – less
profitable.
It is important to highlight that small yet persistent intraday return seasonalities can have
large low frequency effects. To illustrate this point, figure 12 depicts the cumulative returns of the
CT C, OD,OD+ and BtD strategies for a one dollar investment in January 2004. The overnight
36Sharpe ratios are computed from daily risk free rates implied by 4 week U.S. Treasury bills obtained from CRSP. Return
volatilities (the denominator of the Sharpe ratio) are computed using daily data.
37The large number of zero returns is also what causes the large kurtosis. The positive skewness of BtD occurs because the
RSV < 0 signal filters a significant fraction of the negative returns.
28
=== PAGE 31 ===
strategies have performed exceptionally well in the sense that they never experience large negative
returns. Remarkably, the BtD strategy has positive returns during the financial crises even though
the strategy never shorts the market. Panel (a) displays returns for a hypothetical investor who
trades without costs. Trading the OD (OD+), a one dollar initial investment in 2004 generated a
portfolio value of $1 .9 ($2.8) in December 2020. Panel (b) of figure 12 displays cumulative returns
including transaction costs. The CT Creturn remains unchanged as it is a passive strategy (we
only have to roll the contract at a quarterly basis and pay for the spread between the initial buy in
2004 and final sell in 2020). With transaction costs, the OD is not profitable in practice. However,
the BtD strategy earns large positive returns, generating a portfolio value of $1 .9 and while it does
not beat a passive position in the market, it has a significantly higher Sharpe ratio and does not
experience large losses related to the business cycle.
h
Insert table IX and figure 12 here
i
VI. Conclusion
In this paper, we study returns to holding U.S. equity futures around the clock and document a
large positive drift in returns accruing during the opening hours of European market regular trading
hours.
We argue that the large positive drift in returns is consistent with standard theories of demand
for immediacy and the associated liquidity provision by risk-averse market makers. Consistent with
such theories, we show that overnight returns have a strong relationship with (U.S.) end-of-day
order imbalances, and that the relationship is asymmetric: while large negative order imbalances
at the end of the U.S. trading day are followed by large return reversals overnight, the response to
large positive end-of-day order imbalances is muted. This asymmetry in return reversals following
negative and positive order imbalance days is what generates the unconditionally positive returns
around European opening times. We conjecture that the asymmetry in return reversals arise due to
time-varying risk bearing capacity of market makers in this market, which decreases during periods
of large market sell-offs. Finally, we show that the demand for immediacy hypothesis is not only
qualitatively consistent with the return and order flow patterns in the data but also provides a
quantitatively-plausible explanation for the overnight drift.
29
=== PAGE 32 ===
References
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Liquidity and leverage, Journal of Financial Interme-
diation 19, 418–437 Risk Transfer Mechanisms and Financial Stability.
, 2014a, Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk, Review of Financial Studies 27, 373–403.
, 2014b, Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk, The Review of Financial Studies 27, 373–403.
Ai, Hengjie, and Ravi Bansal, 2018, Risk preferences and the macroeconomic announcement pre-
mium, Econometrica 86, 1383–1430.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1980, Dealership market: Market-making with inventory,
Journal of Financial Economics 8, 31–53.
Andersen, Torben G, Oleg Bondarenko, Albert S Kyle, and Anna A Obizhaeva, 2018, Intraday
trading invariance in the e-mini s&p 500 futures market, working paper.
An´ e, Thierry, and H´ elyette Geman, 2000, Order flow, transaction clock, and normality of asset
returns, The Journal of Finance 55, 2259–2284.
Attari, Mukarram, Antonio S Mello, and Martin E Ruckes, 2005, Arbitraging arbitrageurs, The
Journal of Finance 60, 2471–2511.
Bernard, Victor L, and Jacob K Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: delayed price
response or risk premium?, Journal of Accounting research 27, 1–36.
Black, Fischer, 1976, Studies of stock price volatility changes, Proceedings of the 1976 Meetings of
the Americal Statistical Association, Business and Economics Statistics pp. 177–181.
Bogousslavsky, Vincent, 2018, The cross-section of intraday and overnight returns, Working paper.
Bondarenko, Oleg, and Dmitriy Muravyev, 2020, Market Return Around the Clock: A Puzzle,
SSRN Abstract 3596245.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity,
Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.
30
=== PAGE 33 ===
Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005, Predatory trading, The Journal of Fi-
nance 60, 1825–1863.
Christie, Andrew A, 1982, The stochastic behavior of common stock variances: Value, leverage and
interest rate effects, Journal of financial Economics 10, 407–432.
Cliff, Michael, Michael Cooper, and Huseyin Gulen, 2008, Return differences between trading and
non-trading hours: Like night and day, Working paper.
Comerton-Forde, Carole, Terrence Hendershott, Charles M Jones, Pamela C Moulton, and Mark S
Seasholes, 2010, Time variation in liquidity: The role of market-maker inventories and revenues,
The journal of finance 65, 295–331.
Danıelsson, J´ on, Hyun Song Shin, and Jean-Pierre Zigrand, 2004, The impact of risk regulation on
price dynamics, Journal of Banking & Finance 28, 1069–1087.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital, The
Journal of Finance 65, 1237–1267.
Easley, David, Marcos M. L´ opez de Prado, and Maureen O’Hara, 2012, Flow toxicity and liquidity
in a high-frequency world, The Review of Financial Studies 25, 1457–1493.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2021, Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual fund
returns, in The Fama Portfolio . pp. 261–300 (University of Chicago Press).
Foucault, Thierry, Marco Pagano, and Ailsa R¨ oell, 2013, Market liquidity: theory, evidence, and
policy (Oxford University Press).
Glosten, L., and P. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market with
heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics pp. p. 71–100.
Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2014, Bond supply and excess bond returns, Review of
Financial Studies 27, 663–713.
Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially constrained
arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361–407.
31
=== PAGE 34 ===
Grossman, Sanford J, and Merton H Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, the Journal of
Finance 43, 617–633.
Hansch, Oliver, Narayan Y Naik, and S Viswanathan, 1998, Do inventories matter in dealership
markets? Evidence from the London Stock Exchange, The Journal of Finance 53, 1623–1656.
Harvey, Campbell R, Yan Liu, and Alessio Saretto, 2020, An evaluation of alternative multiple
testing methods for finance applications, The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 10, 199–248.
Heston, Steven L, Robert A Korajczyk, and Ronnie Sadka, 2010, Intraday patterns in the cross-
section of stock returns, The Journal of Finance 65, 1369–1407.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction: Extra-
neous events and underreaction to earnings news, The Journal of Finance 64, 2289–2325.
Ho, Thomas, and Hans R Stoll, 1981, Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncer-
tainty, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 47–73.
Ho, Thomas SY, and Hans R Stoll, 1983, The dynamics of dealer markets under competition, The
Journal of Finance 38, 1053–1074.
Hu, Grace Xing, Jun Pan, Jiang Wang, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2019, Premium for heightened uncer-
tainty: Solving the fomc puzzle, Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Karagozoglu, Ahmet K, Terrence F Martell, and George HK Wang, 2003, The split of the s&p 500
futures contract: Effects on liquidity and market dynamics, Review of Quantitative Finance and
Accounting 21, 323–348.
Kelly, Michael A, and Steven P Clark, 2011, Returns in trading versus non-trading hours: The
difference is day and night, Journal of Asset Management 12, 132–145.
Kyle, Albert S, 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
, and Anna A Obizhaeva, 2016, Market microstructure invariance: Empirical hypotheses,
Econometrica 84, 1345–1404.
Lou, Dong, Christopher Polk, and Spyros Skouras, 2017, A tug of war: Overnight versus intraday
expected returns, Working Paper, London School of Economics.
32
=== PAGE 35 ===
Lucca, David O., and Emanuel Moench, 2015, The pre-FOMC announcement drift, Journal of
Finance 70, 329–371.
Lucca, David O., and Or Shachar, 2014, Lunch Anyone? Volatility on the Tokyo Stock Exchange
around the Lunch Break on May 23, 2013, and Stock Market Circuit Breakers, Liberty Street
Economics.
Madhavan, Ananth, and Seymour Smidt, 1993, An analysis of changes in specialist inventories and
quotations, The Journal of Finance 48, 1595–1628.
Malkhozov, Aytek, Philippe Mueller, Andrea Vedolin, and Gyuri Venter, 2016, Mortgage risk and
the yield curve, Review of Financial Studies 29, 1220–1253.
Mandelbrot, Benoit, and Howard M. Taylor, 1967, On the distribution of stock price differences,
Operations Research 15, 1057–1062.
Menkveld, Albert J, 2016, The economics of high-frequency trading, Annual Review of Financial
Economics 8, 1–24.
Merton, R. C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates, Journal
of Finance 29, 449–470.
Mildenstein, Eckart, and Harold Schleef, 1983, The optimal pricing policy of a monopolistic market
maker in the equity market, The Journal of Finance 38, 218–231.
Naik, Narayan Y, and Pradeep K Yadav, 2003, Do dealer firms manage inventory on a stock-by-stock
or a portfolio basis?, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 325–353.
O’Hara, Maureen, and George S. Oldfield, 1986, The microeconomics of market making,The Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21, 361–376.
Patton, Andrew, Dimitris N Politis, and Halbert White, 2009, Correction to “automatic block-
length selection for the dependent bootstrap” by d. politis and h. white, Econometric Reviews
28, 372–375.
Ready, Robert, Nikolai Roussanov, and Colin Ward, 2013, Commodity trade and the carry trade:
a tale of two countries, Working Paper, University of Rochester.
33
=== PAGE 36 ===
Rostek, Marzena, and Marek Weretka, 2015, Dynamic thin markets, The Review of Financial
Studies 28, 2946–2992.
Sadka, Ronnie, 2006, Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of
liquidity risk, Journal of Financial Economics 80, 309–349.
Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson, 2013, How much do investors care about macroeconomic risk? ev-
idence from scheduled economic announcements, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
48, 343–375.
, 2014, Asset pricing: A tale of two days, Journal of Financial Economics 113, 171–201.
Shen, Pu, and Ross M Starr, 2002, Market-makers’ supply and pricing of financial market liquidity,
Economics letters 76, 53–58.
Stoll, Hans R, 1978, The supply of dealer services in securities markets, The Journal of Finance 33,
1133–1151.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 2001, Strategic trading in a dynamic noisy market, The Journal of Finance 56,
131–171.
Weill, Pierre-Olivier, 2007, Leaning against the wind, The Review of Economic Studies 74, 1329–
1354.
34
=== PAGE 37 ===
VII. Tables
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Mean −0.46 0 .35 0 .15 0 .05 −0.03 0 .04 0 .46 0 .43 1 .48 0 .35 −0.08 0 .15 0 .61 −0.08 0 .26
t-stat −1.43 1 .80 0 .68 0 .25 −0.19 0 .29 2 .77 2 .75 7 .13 1 .33 −0.32 0 .63 2 .46 −0.31 0 .71
p-value 0 .15 0 .072 0 .50 0 .80 0 .85 0 .77 0 .0056 0 .0060 1 .1 · 10−12 0.18 0 .75 0 .53 0 .014 0 .75 0 .48
median 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .64 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00
Sdev 24 .94 14 .77 16 .75 14 .68 13 .58 10 .34 12 .60 11 .95 15 .78 21 .46 19 .64 17 .50 18 .59 19 .78 28 .76
Skew −3.73 0 .26 −0.60 −3.61 −6.65 −0.67 7 .38 −0.32 1 .20 0 .02 −0.87 −0.45 1 .42 0 .26 1 .03
Kurt 86 .76 40 .61 55 .29 115 .02 184 .65 35 .32 213 .51 34 .03 33 .77 16 .90 21 .73 19 .83 51 .11 60 .80 45 .80
(a) Overnight
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18
Mean −1.24 −0.25 −0.23 0 .41 −0.15 −0.06 0 .61 0 .00 −0.43
t-stat −2.60 −0.45 −0.52 1 .07 −0.37 −0.12 0 .99 0 .01 −3.62
p-value 0 .093 0 .66 0 .60 0 .28 0 .71 0 .91 0 .32 1 .00 0 .00030
median 0 .00 0 .85 1 .20 1 .12 0 .96 0 .00 1 .20 1 .10 0 .00
Sdev 36 .11 42 .28 32 .96 29 .17 30 .52 36 .80 50 .79 20 .91 9 .16
Skew −0.99 −0.07 −0.36 −0.48 0 .51 0 .31 1 .25 −1.88 −0.56
Kurt 19 .40 11 .10 10 .40 24 .56 21 .12 14 .26 30 .65 21 .09 61 .82
(b) Intraday
Table I. Summary statistics: hourly returns around the clock
Summary statistics for S&P 500 e-mini futures hourly log returns. Returns are computed from mid quotes at the top of the order book and reported in basis
points. Panel (a) displays overnight hours and panel (b) displays intraday hours. Mean, medians and standard deviations are displayed in basis point terms. t-
statistics testing again the null of zero returns are computed from HAC robust standard errors. p-values indicate significance levels under a student-t distribution.
Sample period is January 1998 — December 2020.
35
=== PAGE 38 ===
Abbreviation Name Open Close Time
difference
ET open ET close
NZSX** New
Zealand
10:00 17:00 16 18:00 01:00
TSE* Tokyo 09:00 15:00 13 20:00 02:00
ASX** Australia 10:00 16:00 14 20:00 02:00
SGX* Singapore 09:00 17:00 12 21:00 05:00
SSE* Shanghai 09:15 15:00 12 21:15 03:00
HKE* Hong Kong 09:30 16:00 12 21:30 04:00
NSE* India 09:15 15:30 9.5 23:45 06:00
DIFX* Dubai 10:00 14:00 8 02:00 06:00
RTS* Russia 09:30 19:00 7 02:30 14:00
FWB Frankfurt 08:00 20:00 6 02:00 14:00
JSE* South
Africa
08:30 17:00 6 02:30 11:00
LSE London 08:00 16:30 5 03:00 11:30
BMF** Sao Paulo 10:00 17:00 1 09:00 16:00
NYSE New York 09:30 16:00 0 09:30 16:00
TSX Toronto 09:30 16:00 0 09:30 16:00
Table II. Open and closing times of global equity cash indices
The table displays opening and closing times for 14 global equity markets, in the local
time zone and in corresponding Eastern Time Zone (ET) for June, 2018. The abbrevia-
tions are NYSE=New York Stock Exchange, TSE=Tokyo Stock Exchange, LSE=London
Stock Exchange, HKE=Hong Kong Stock Exchange,NSE=National Stock Exchange of India,
BMF=Bovespa Bolsa de Valores Mercadorias & Futuros de Sao Paulo, ASX=Australian Se-
curities Exchange, FWB=Frankfurt Stock Exchange Deutsche B¨ orse, RTS=Russian Trading
System, JSE=Johannesburg Stock Exchange, DIFX=NASDAQ Dubai, SSE=Shanghai Stock
Exchange, SGX= Singapore Exchange, NZSX=New Zealand Stock Exchange, TSX=Toronto
Stock Exchange. Opening and closing times are collected from the public website of each
exchange. * Denotes locations that do not observe Daylight Savings Time (DST). Relative
to the table, the time difference is plus 1 hour outside the U.S. DST period. ** Denotes
locations south of equator that do observe DST. Relative to the table, the time difference is
plus 2 hours when outside the U.S. DST period and in the DST period of the given region.
36
=== PAGE 39 ===
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Mean − 1 .12 − 0 .01 − 0 .78 − 0 .51 − 0 .04 − 0 .87 − 0 .13 0 .94 2 .39 0 .54 0 .15 0 .07 − 0 .00 0 .97 0 .27
t-stat − 3 .62 − 0 .03 − 2 .20 − 1 .44 − 0 .12 − 1 .69 − 0 .34 2 .30 6 .71 1 .99 0 .56 0 .26 − 0 .00 4 .78 1 .69
Median − 1 .37 0 .00 − 0 .42 − 0 .09 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .56 1 .53 0 .13 − 0 .02 0 .11 0 .00 0 .70 0 .19
Sdev 23 .13 26 .53 27 .03 26 .98 27 .90 38 .71 29 .79 31 .27 26 .31 21 .27 20 .92 20 .25 18 .74 15 .37 12 .14
Skew 0 .11 0 .01 0 .09 − 0 .02 − 0 .00 − 0 .05 0 .06 0 .01 0 .11 0 .12 0 .04 0 .01 − 0 .07 0 .22 0 .42
Kurt 4 .32 3 .82 3 .96 4 .00 3 .87 4 .33 3 .93 4 .01 4 .96 7 .01 6 .97 6 .54 6 .92 6 .67 8 .88
(a) Overnight
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18 CTC
Mean − 0 . 46 − 0 . 44 − 0 . 39 − 0 . 21 − 0 . 48 − 0 . 36 0 . 03 0 . 81 − 1 . 00 − 2 . 36
t-stat − 5 . 74 − 5 . 75 − 4 . 21 − 1 . 92 − 4 . 32 − 3 . 36 0 . 33 6 . 12 − 2 . 80 − 1 . 14
Median − 0 . 50 − 0 . 39 − 0 . 28 − 0 . 21 − 0 . 38 − 0 . 42 − 0 . 03 0 . 78 − 1 . 68 − 0 . 91
Sdev 6 . 04 5 . 80 7 . 00 8 . 22 8 . 48 8 . 28 7 . 20 9 . 97 46 . 71 136 . 19
Skew − 0 . 54 − 0 . 33 0 . 35 0 . 31 0 . 22 1 . 53 0 . 50 0 . 23 0 . 04 − 0 . 12
Kurt 16 . 83 8 . 31 7 . 85 7 . 69 7 . 00 21 . 40 9 . 97 12 . 03 3 . 52 4 . 00
(b) Intraday
Hour 15:00-15:15 15:15-15:30 15:30-15:45 15:45-16:00 16:00-16:15 15:15-16:15
Mean − 0 .33 0 .24 0 .49 − 0 .29 0 .96 0 .24
t-stat − 1 .95 1 .47 3 .02 − 1 .93 7 .04 2 .70
Median − 0 .02 0 .00 0 .15 − 0 .32 0 .77 0 .28
Sdev 12 .88 12 .40 12 .24 11 .42 10 .29 6 .55
Skew 0 .10 0 .09 − 0 .07 − 0 .02 0 .43 0 .03
Kurt 4 .59 4 .42 3 .96 4 .52 6 .90 3 .82
(c) EOD
Table III. Summary statistics: relative signed volume around the clock
Summary statistics for S&P 500 e-mini futures hourly relative signed volume defined as
RSVt = #buy orders− #sell orders
#buy orders+ #sell orders ∈ [−100%, 100%],
which states order imbalance relative to total volume in percentages. Panel (a) displays overnight hours and panel (b) displays intraday
hours. Panel (c) displays RSVt in quarterly intervals between 15:00 – 16:15 and in the final column reports summary statistics for
RSV close
t which is relative signed volume measured between 15:15 – 16:15. Mean, medians and standard deviations are displayed in
percentages. Sample period is January 1998 — December 2020.
37
=== PAGE 40 ===
VIX Low VIX Med VIX High VIX Low VIX Med VIX High
Panel A1: Positive RSV Panel A2: Average VIX
RSV Low 1.23 1.29 1.20 12.71 19.16 31.56
RSV Med 4.04 4.10 4.06 12.60 18.32 30.41
RSV High 9.55 9.43 9.37 12.49 18.04 28.11
Panel A3: OD Average Returns
VIX Low VIX Med VIX High High - Low p-value
RSV Low 0.59 0.80 2.33 1.74 0.54
RSV Med -2.41 1.96 6.02 8.43 0.00
RSV High -0.12 -0.11 -1.96 -1.84 0.44
High-Low 0.71 0.91 4.30
p-value 0.59 0.67 0.22
Panel B1: Negative RSV Panel B2: Average VIX
RSV Low -1.33 -1.32 -1.40 13.17 19.24 28.44
RSV Med -4.03 -4.12 -4.11 12.88 18.78 29.63
RSV High -9.56 -10.07 -9.66 12.88 19.19 30.63
Panel B3: OD Average Returns
VIX Low VIX Med VIX High High - Low p-value
RSV Low 0.88 4.93 12.66 11.78 0.00
RSV Med 3.23 6.33 13.03 9.80 0.00
RSV High 4.42 8.93 7.01 2.60 0.31
High-Low 3.54 3.99 -5.64
p-value 0.02 0.09 0.12
Table IV. Double sorts on relative signed volume and closing VIX
We split the sample into positive (panel a) and negative (panel b) closing relative signed
volume. Within each set we double-sort trading days into terciles of relative signed volume
RSV and the closing level of the V IX. Within each set we report average RSV s and
V IXlevels (A1, A2, B1, B2). Double sorted overnight drift OD return averages are reported
(A3, B3) along with high minus low differences and p-values testing the difference against
zero. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
38
=== PAGE 41 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
RSV 3:15-4:15 -1.89 -5.58 -6.81 -2.29 2.33 0.22 -1.64 -5.75 -17.46 -17.96 4.55 1.40
(-0.67) (-1.95) (-4.16) (-1.05) (1.61) (0.13) (-1.79) (-3.19) (-8.14) (-6.01) (1.07) (0.55)
µ -0.18 0.38 0.15 0.16 0.07 0.05 0.34 0.41 1.45 0.32 -0.05 0.03
(-0.44) (3.03) (1.23) (1.46) (0.60) (0.37) (2.06) (2.71) (7.19) (1.21) (-0.16) (0.13)
Adj. R2(%) 0.00 0.07 0.07 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.11 0.57 0.31 0.03 0.00
(a)
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
RSV 15:15-16:15 -1.88 -5.67 -6.70 -2.13 2.43 0.25 -1.58 -5.65 -17.25 -17.85 4.58 1.11
(-0.66) (-1.94) (-4.19) (-1.01) (1.67) (0.15) (-1.81) (-3.13) (-8.10) (-6.02) (1.07) (0.46)
RSV 14:15-15:15 -0.12 2.17 -2.68 -4.51 -2.74 -0.84 -1.63 -2.52 -5.45 -2.89 -0.64 7.56
(-0.03) (0.41) (-1.04) (-2.14) (-1.20) (-0.58) (-1.10) (-1.30) (-3.26) (-1.19) (-0.39) (3.83)
RSV 13:15-14:15 3.49 0.10 0.86 -2.81 0.27 0.07 -1.26 0.28 1.04 0.95 1.39 0.30
(1.06) (0.11) (0.60) (-2.89) (0.21) (0.08) (-1.24) (0.36) (0.60) (0.49) (0.86) (0.18)
µ -0.17 0.38 0.15 0.13 0.06 0.04 0.33 0.40 1.44 0.31 -0.04 0.05
(-0.40) (2.98) (1.24) (1.27) (0.54) (0.36) (2.02) (2.67) (7.26) (1.19) (-0.15) (0.24)
Adj. R2(%) -0.02 0.03 0.04 0.11 -0.01 -0.05 -0.01 0.09 0.60 0.27 -0.02 0.08
(b)
Table V. Regression: overnight returns on closing relative signed volume
Panel (a) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on closing relative signed volume:
rH
t,n = µn + βSV
n RSV close
t−1 + εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12.
Panel (b) estimates a multivariate extension to this regression that includes relative signed volume recorded in the final three hours of
the trading day before the maintenance break. Days where the time difference between London and New York is different from 5 hours
are excluded. Estimates are in basis points. t-statistics reported in parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered
within each month. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
39
=== PAGE 42 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
RSV 1H Lag -0.41 -1.31 -0.04 -0.14 0.46 0.40 2.21 0.95 0.44 0.85 0.00 0.77
(-0.55) (-1.46) (-0.08) (-0.30) (1.25) (1.17) (7.89) (1.84) (0.76) (0.91) (0.01) (0.86)
µ -0.19 0.35 0.14 0.15 0.08 0.05 0.36 0.39 1.40 0.25 -0.04 0.03
(-0.47) (2.76) (1.09) (1.43) (0.67) (0.37) (2.29) (2.60) (6.79) (1.04) (-0.13) (0.14)
Adj.R2(%) 0.01 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.61 0.07 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01
(a)
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
RSV 1H Lag -0.43 -1.31 -0.13 -0.25 0.34 0.24 2.21 0.98 0.10 0.72 0.52 0.68
(-0.58) (-1.51) (-0.29) (-0.59) (0.97) (0.70) (7.98) (2.13) (0.18) (0.68) (0.61) (0.75)
RSV 2H Lag -1.91 -0.49 1.18 -0.27 0.65 0.80 -0.34 0.03 0.96 -0.88 -1.70 0.58
(-0.76) (-1.32) (1.04) (-0.61) (2.02) (2.28) (-1.46) (0.12) (1.43) (-1.42) (-1.39) (0.46)
RSV 3H Lag 0.67 0.47 0.79 0.57 -0.12 0.85 0.34 -0.71 0.27 -1.56 -0.78 -1.13
(0.19) (0.21) (1.36) (1.26) (-0.29) (1.84) (0.75) (-2.04) (1.00) (-1.97) (-0.99) (-2.58)
RSV 4H Lag 1.27 -1.09 1.23 0.57 0.54 0.40 0.22 1.46 0.39 -0.18 0.52 0.60
(0.43) (-0.26) (0.57) (1.32) (0.90) (0.99) (0.45) (3.12) (0.88) (-0.25) (0.57) (0.76)
RSV 5H Lag 0.12 2.87 -6.45 2.66 0.22 0.02 0.93 -0.33 0.28 1.07 0.20 -1.87
(0.04) (0.66) (-3.09) (3.28) (0.74) (0.05) (2.90) (-0.95) (0.44) (1.18) (0.26) (-2.64)
RSV 6H Lag -0.70 -1.82 -0.16 -3.07 2.11 0.59 -0.51 -0.64 1.36 0.89 -0.21 0.00
(-0.19) (-1.55) (-0.05)(-1.74) (2.00) (1.97) (-0.78) (-2.03) (2.29) (0.71) (-0.29) (0.01)
RSV 7H Lag 1.53 -1.13 -1.64 -4.82 0.75 0.36 -0.49 0.13 1.30 0.50 -0.40 0.54
(0.50) (-0.79) (-0.86) (-2.74)(0.56) (0.47) (-1.49) (0.22) (2.11) (0.47) (-0.58) (0.67)
RSV 8H Lag 1.42 2.78 0.93 -0.86 -1.08 1.17 2.86 -0.25 1.24 1.14 -0.69 -0.30
(0.18) (1.28) (0.76) (-0.51) (-0.55) (0.67) (2.28) (-1.00) (1.74) (1.00) (-0.93) (-0.66)
RSV 9H Lag -5.49 1.25 -5.56 0.02 -1.29 -1.55 -4.09 -3.51 -0.67 -2.19 -0.40 -1.41
(-1.25) (0.45) (-1.94) (0.01) (-0.88) (-0.86)(-4.23) (-3.23) (-1.62) (-1.64) (-0.44) (-1.62)
RSV 10H Lag 2.34 2.02 -3.72 -2.21 -1.40 -0.76 -1.02 -2.93 -9.56 -1.20 1.49 0.86
(1.29) (0.77) (-1.21) (-1.06) (-0.71) (-0.53) (-0.59)(-1.61) (-4.52) (-3.24) (2.19) (1.11)
RSV 11H Lag -1.87 0.55 0.65 -4.57 -2.87 1.99 1.46 -2.52 -9.21 -2.91 -0.09 -0.46
(-0.98) (0.30) (0.24) (-2.29) (-1.59) (1.23) (1.10) (-1.53) (-5.12) (-1.41) (-0.17) (-0.94)
RSV 12H Lag -0.53 1.60 -1.04 3.26 -2.86 1.12 0.68 1.22 -4.61 -14.94 -2.74 -0.35
(-0.34) (1.96) (-0.46) (1.81) (-1.19) (0.63) (0.40) (0.81) (-3.54) (-5.11) (-1.80) (-1.03)
µ -0.18 0.35 0.12 0.11 0.04 0.06 0.33 0.42 1.49 0.26 0.04 0.02
(-0.42) (2.78) (0.94) (1.14) (0.31) (0.57) (2.15) (2.72) (7.88) (0.97) (0.14) (0.10)
Adj.R2(%) -0.15 -0.04 0.03 0.09 -0.07 0.05 0.66 0.21 0.83 0.32 -0.07 0.02
(b)
Table VI. Falsification test
Panel (a) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on a one hour lag of relative signed
volume. Panel (b) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on twelve lags of hourly relative
signed volume. Days where the time difference between London and New York is different from 5 hours are excluded.
Estimates are in basis points. t-statistics reported in parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered
within each month. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
40
=== PAGE 43 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
RSV 15:15-16:15 -3.84 2.58 -4.75 -0.80 -0.68 2.55 -11.50 -0.85 -1.99 -3.83 -10.05 -7.12
(-0.26) (0.29) (-0.64) (-0.13) (-0.07) (0.47) (-1.51) (-0.14) (-0.20) (-0.30) (-0.66) (-0.49)
NEG 0.33 -0.14 1.26 1.06 0.56 0.52 0.10 -0.65 3.60 -0.37 -1.01 -2.30
(0.23) (-0.14) (1.12) (1.53) (0.83) (1.07) (0.16) (-1.03) (3.46) (-0.22) (-0.83) (-1.50)
RSV x NEG -8.67 -25.90 7.06 14.35 20.07 3.46 9.07 -21.69 -6.20 -3.68 20.90 -6.56
(-0.29) (-1.53) (0.52) (1.41) (1.36) (0.27) (0.86) (-3.51) (-0.36) (-0.19) (1.05) (-0.35)
µ -0.94 -0.05 -0.62 -0.13 -0.02 -0.08 0.56 0.47 -0.32 0.00 0.91 1.32
(-0.99) (-0.08) (-1.40) (-0.37) (-0.06) (-0.23) (1.11) (1.08) (-0.49) (0.00) (1.13) (1.48)
Adj.R2(%) 0.05 0.21 0.16 0.07 0.09 0.02 0.14 0.17 1.33 0.01 0.09 0.19
(a)
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
RSV 15:15-16:15 -45.77 -11.66 45.29 -13.05 -4.32 -12.37 30.40 -10.45 66.39 19.35 -12.85 -49.54
(-1.48) (-0.47) (2.12) (-0.72) (-0.21) (-0.58) (3.21) (-0.41) (3.53) (1.03) (-0.49) (-2.41)
VIX 15:15-16:15 -0.02 0.02 0.08 -0.01 -0.05 0.02 0.07 0.03 0.07 -0.05 -0.10 -0.06
(-0.17) (0.50) (1.10) (-0.35) (-1.36) (0.48) (2.14) (0.97) (0.72) (-0.74) (-1.13) (-0.54)
RSV x VIX 1.94 0.17 -3.05 0.62 0.49 0.71 -2.09 0.23 -5.33 -1.22 1.08 3.06
(1.11) (0.11) (-2.44) (0.60) (0.38) (0.56) (-3.78) (0.14) (-4.23) (-1.03) (0.71) (2.41)
µ -0.22 -0.03 -1.64 0.27 0.74 -0.32 -1.00 0.10 0.15 0.79 1.86 1.60
(-0.12) (-0.04) (-1.41) (0.57) (1.35) (-0.41) (-1.72) (0.28) (0.08) (0.66) (1.32) (0.76)
Adj.R2(%) 0.05 0.05 0.64 -0.06 0.04 0.01 0.78 0.02 2.48 0.00 0.16 0.47
(b)
Table VII. Regression: overnight returns on closing relative signed volume and interactions
Panel (a) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on closing relative signed volume and an interaction term that takes on a value of
‘1’ if RSV close
t−1 < 0 and ‘0’ otherwise
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + βN EG
n 1 N EG,t+ βRSV ×N EG
n RSVt−1,close × 1 N EG,t+ εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12.
Panel (b) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on closing relative signed volume and an closing signed volume interacted with the
level of the VIX from the close of the preceding day
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + βV IX
n V IXclose
t−1 + βRSV ×V IX
n RSV close
t−1 × V IXclose
t−1 + ϵt,n, for n = 1, ...,12,
Days where the time difference between London and New York is different from 5 hours are excluded. Estimates are in basis points. t-statistics reported in
parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered within each month. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
41
=== PAGE 44 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23
RSV -9.34 -13.46 -6.70 -1.46 5.43
(-2.11) (-1.98) (-1.62) (-0.36) (2.43)
DST -1.57 -0.08 -0.15 0.06 0.08
(-2.13) (-0.28) (-0.52) (0.29) (0.25)
RSV × DST 10.77 12.03 -1.20 -0.17 -4.54
(2.09) (1.80) (-0.27) (-0.04) (-1.73)
µ 0.54 0.42 0.26 0.02 -0.09
(0.68) (1.73) (1.09) (0.13) (-0.51)
Adj. R2(%) 0.11 0.13 0.09 0.01 0.03
(a) Asia
24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05
RSV -7.93 -7.21 -31.32 -1.93 6.36
(-3.70) (-1.44) (-5.15) (-0.33) (1.23)
DIF F 3.56 0.59 1.24 2.28 -1.63
(2.18) (2.05) (2.91) (1.26) (-1.08)
RSV × DIF F -7.24 31.00 37.30 15.00 -38.80
(-0.96) (2.53) (1.73) (1.50) (-1.50)
µ 0.42 0.60 1.57 -0.11 -0.01
(2.52) (3.17) (7.13) (-0.30) (-0.02)
Adj. R2(%) 0.47 0.14 0.82 0.07 0.11
(b) Europe
Table VIII. Daylight saving tests
In panel (a) hourly overnight returns are regressed on closing relative signed volume and a dummy variable for daylight
savings time:
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + βDST
n 1 DST ,t+ βSV ×DST
n RSVt−1,close × 1 DST ,t+ εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12,
where the dummy variable takes on a value of ‘0’ in winter time (DST not active) and ‘1’ in summer time (DST active)
and daylight savings is seen from a U.S. perspective. The Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) opens at 19:00 when DST is
not active and at 20:00 when DST is active. Estimates are in basis points. In panel (b) hourly overnight returns are
regressed on closing relative signed volume and time-zone difference dummy:
rH
t,n = µn + βRSV
n RSV close
t−1 + βDIF F
n 1 DIF F,t+ βRSV ×DIF F
n RSVt−1,close × 1 DIF F,t+ εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12,
where the dummy variable takes on a value of ‘0’ when the time-zone difference between London and New York is 5
hours (3282 observations) and a value of ‘1’ when the time-zone difference is 4 hours (240 observations). t-statistics
reported in parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered within months. Sample period is January
1998 – December 2020.
42
=== PAGE 45 ===
CT C CT O OT C OD OD + RSV close
t−1 < 0
Mean 8 .95 4 .62 4 .20 3 .75 6 .21 6 .07
Sdev 19 .35 11 .23 14 .90 2 .65 4 .13 2 .95
Sharpe ratio 0 .42 0 .34 0 .23 1 .10 1 .30 1 .78
beta 1 .00 0 .37 0 .63 0 .02 0 .04 0 .02
Skew 0 .01 −0.67 −0.33 1 .18 2 .16 4 .89
Kurt 20 .06 20 .86 13 .65 32 .91 41 .88 98 .60
(a) Without Transaction Costs
CT C CT O OT C OD OD + RSV close
t−1 < 0
Mean 8 .95 0 .38 −0.05 −0.59 1 .91 4 .04
Sdev 19 .35 11 .23 14 .90 2 .65 4 .12 2 .92
Sharpe ratio 0 .42 −0.04 −0.06 −0.54 0 .26 1 .10
beta 1 .00 0 .37 0 .63 0 .02 0 .04 0 .02
Skew 0 .01 −0.68 −0.35 1 .09 2 .10 4 .77
Kurt 20 .06 20 .84 13 .67 32 .81 41 .61 99 .87
(b) With Transaction Costs
Table IX. Trading strategies
Summary statistics for returns of intraday trading strategies excluding (panel (a)) and including
(panel (b)) transaction costs. CT Cis continuously holding the E-mini contract. CT Ois holding the
contract from 16:15 to 8:30; OT Cis from 9:30 to 16:15; −OR is shortening the opening returns from
8:30 to 10:00; OD is the overnight drift from 2:00 to 3:00; OD+ is from 1:30 to 3:30. RSV close
t−1 < 0
is a buy the dip strategy that goes long from 1:30 to 3:30 only on days following a negative closing
order flow. Means and standard deviations are in annualized percentages. The Sharpe ratios uses
the 4 week U.S. Treasury bill as the risk-free rate. Betas are computed using the CT Creturn as
the market return. Returns excluding transaction cost are computed from mid quotes and returns
including transaction costs are computed from the best bid and ask prices quotes. The sample
period is 2004.1 — 2020.12. The trading strategies start in 2004 as this is where the overnight
bid/ask spread reached its effective minimum of 1 tick.
43
=== PAGE 46 ===

=== PAGE 47 ===

=== PAGE 48 ===
1.00
1.15
1.30
1.45
2.00
2.15
2.30
2.45
3.00
3.15
3.30
3.45
4.00
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Ann. hourly avg. log return (in %, bar)
Figure 3. Intraday return averages
This figure plots average 5 minute returns holding the e-mini contract for the hours 1.00 – 4.00.
Sample period is January 1998 - December 2020.
46
=== PAGE 49 ===

=== PAGE 50 ===

=== PAGE 51 ===

=== PAGE 52 ===
 
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10Return (% p.a)
(a) 24-01
 
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10Return (% p.a) (b) 01-02
 
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10Return (% p.a) (c) 02-03
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1 - p
(d) 24-01
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1 - p (e) 01-02
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
0
0 2
0.4
0 6
0 8
1
1 - p (f
) 02-03
Figure 7. Year-by-year
This figure plots yearly average log returns (top panels) and (1− p) the values from a t-test against the null hypothesis that these returns
are zero (bottom panels). Sub captions indicate the hour of the night. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
50
=== PAGE 53 ===
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Trade Time (ET)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10Normalized Average Volume Traded
TSE Open
HKE Open
LSE Open
FSE Open
NYSE Open NYSE Close
(a)
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 01 02 03 04 05 06 07
Trade Time (ET)
0
0 5
1
1 5
2
2 5
3
3 5
4
Normalized Average Volume Traded (b)
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Trade Time (ET)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9Average Volume Traded
104
(c)
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 01 02 03 04 05 06 07
Trade Time (ET)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000Average Volume Traded (d)
Figure
8. Intraday equity volumes
Panel (a) plots the average 5 minute trading volume of the e-mini for the entire trading day, showing the full intraday pattern of volume.
Panel (b) focuses only on volume outside U.S. open hours. Volumes are normalised by dividing each 5-minute volume by its daily
volume, and then averaging normalised 5-minute intervals over all days in the sample. Panel (c) plots average volumes for all hours of
the day during 2020. Panel (d) zooms in on average overnight volumes during 2020.
51
=== PAGE 54 ===

=== PAGE 55 ===

=== PAGE 56 ===

=== PAGE 57 ===

=== PAGE 58 ===
The Overnight Drift
Internet Appendix
Sections A.1 reports supplementary results to our central empirical contribution which is the
documentation of consistent positive returns for holding U.S. equity futures around the opening of
European financial markets. Section A.3 provides a survey of Grossman and Miller (1988) (GM)
interpreting the results of that paper in the context of our setting. Section A.2 reports robustness
tests related to our market making explanation. This section repeats our main inventory risk
tests with an alternative measure of order imbalance. Section A.4 discusses a series of alternative
explanations based on volatility risk, liquidity risk, the arrival of overnight news, and the resolution
of uncertainty.
A.1. Supplementary Results: Overnight Drift
A. Relationship to existing overnight literature
Figure A.1 displays cumulative close-to-close ( CT C) log returns on S&P 500 futures: $1 invested
at the beginning of 1983 becomes $27 dollars by the end of 2020, translating into an annual log
return of 8.65%. Decomposing into intraday versus overnight components open-to-close ( OT C) log
returns averaged 5.12% while close-to-open ( CT O) log returns averaged 3 .53% This figure updates
the findings of Cliff, Cooper, and Gulen (2008) and Kelly and Clark (2011) who both document that
equities earn a substantial proportion of their returns during the overnight period. Overnight return
patterns are also well discussed in the financial press. 38. We note here that earning a substantial
overnight returns is not, in itself, that surprising. Given the length of the overnight period one
would even expect the overnight period to earn the largest return if information flowed continuous
as in a Black-Scholes economy. What is surprising, is that the overnight versus intraday return
dissection only becomes noticeable after the advent of overnight electronic markets. Indeed, the red
and blue lines track each other quite closely until after the introduction of GLOBEX and shortly
before the introduction of the e-mini contract. These dates are marked by vertical dotted lines.
Our discovery of an overnight drift in U.S. equities during the opening of European markets and
our explanation based on demand for immediacy are closely related to this long standing puzzle.
h
Insert figure A.1 here
i
B. Supplementary Results: Section II
B.1. Day of the week
Panel (a) of figure A.3 plots cumulative 5-minute returns sampled for each trading day of the week.
In terms of close-to-close returns, rT U E
CT C ∼ rW ED
CT C ∼ rT HU
CT C while returns on Mondays and Fridays are
significantly lower. Considering the OD, it is clearly visible in each day of the week, and displays
far less dispersion than close-to-close returns, suggesting that it is a systematic phenomenon. Panel
(a) of Table A.5 tests this claim formally using a regression dummy framework as above. In all days
38www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-06-05/the-stock-rebound-really-gets-going-after-wall-street-logs-off
www.bloombergquint.com/markets/volatility-bout-puts-outsize-overnight-stock-moves-in-focus
1
=== PAGE 59 ===
of the week, the 2:00 - 3:00 return is positive and significant at the 1% level and the magnitude of
the returns is also quite similar.
Panel (b) of Table A.5, on the other hand, shows that the OP returns are always negative but
only statistically significant on Thursdays and Fridays with mean returns equal to −2.10 and −3.03
basis points per hour per day, with t-statistics equal to −2.02 and −2.76, respectively. Figure
A.10 reports three pieces of suggestive evidence as to why the OP occurs only on Thursdays and
Fridays: Firstly, we observe more U.S. macro announcements released at 8:30 on Thursdays and
Fridays. Generally, we experience large positive returns leading up to announcements, as has been
documented in the literature (Savor and Wilson (2013)). We conjecture that (short-lived) price-
reversals following the macro announcements partly explain the negative opening returns. Secondly,
we do not observe many FOMC announcements on Thursdays and Fridays and we also know that
returns typically are positive in the hours leading up to FOMC announcements which subsequently
do not revert Lucca and Moench (2015). Thirdly, we observe most negative earnings announcements
days are Thursdays and Fridays. In summary, while OP returns is concentrated in the final days
of the week, OD returns are systematically positive and significant in each day of the week.

Insert figure A.3 and A.10 and table A.5 here

B.2. Month of the year
Panel (b) of figure A.4 plots average cumulative 5-minute returns across the trading day for the
futures contract roll months March, June, September and December. While ID returns display
significant variation, in particularOP are large and negative in September equal to−3.45%, opening
returns are either slightly positive or negative in other months. The OD, however, is clearly visible
in all months. More formally, Table A.6 reports the statistical significance within each calendar
month. Consistent with Figure A.4, the OD drift is positive in all months of the year and statistically
significant at conventional levels in 9 out of 12 months.

Insert figure A.4 and table A.6 here

A.2. Supplementary Results: Section III & IV of paper
Sections III and IV conducted a number of tests of the relationship between the overnight drift
and trading imbalances as predicted by by inventory risk models along the lines of Grossman and
Miller. In these sections, we primarily measured end-of-day (EOD) order imbalances in terms of
RSV and the sample period was 1998–2020. In this part of the OA we present counterparts to the
results of the main body but using SV instead. We use the sample period 2007–2020 since total
volumes were relatively stationary over this period, see figure A.6. 39 Using the SV measure in the
early sample period would be problematic since volumes has increased by more than a factor 1000
since the early 2000’s; thus, an order imbalance of 1000 contracts would be massive in 1998 when
the e-mini had just started trading but it would be small in 2020.
Table A.7 reports summary statistics for hourly SVt. On average, close-to-close SVt is equal to
-2,217 contracts (t-stat = -3.27), is highly volatile, and negatively skewed. Indeed, the median SVt
is actually positive. Negative CT C SVt’s are consistent with the idea that the futures market is
39Closing order imbalances can be very extreme as seen in 2006 where the was a net selloff of more than 250,0000 contracts
in the last hour of trading: A sense of calm that returned to the market Tuesday disappeared in the final minutes of trading as
stocks gyrated and reversed earlier gains. see www.money.cnn.com/2006/05/23/markets/markets_newyork/index.htm.
2
=== PAGE 60 ===
traded as a hedging instrument for the underlying. However, while SVt’s are negative during the
day, they are largely positive overnight. During the OD hour, SVt is equal to 124 contracts with a
t-statistic of 4.23, mirroring the unconditional positive returns during this hour. Panel (c) zoom in
on the signed volume during the closing hour of U.S. trading. In the following, we use the last hour
preceding the maintenance to measure closing order imbalances. Thus, SV close
t denotes the order
imbalance based on all trades sampled during the hour 15:15 – 16:15.

Insert table A.7 here

Consistent with the findings for the sample period January 1998 – December 2020 usingRSV close
t ,
figure A.7 shows that sorting days based onSV close
t , positive overnight returns occur only on nights
following market sell-offs (negative end-of-day order imbalances). Price reversals following market
rallies are much more modest thus we have uncovered a strong demand asymmetry between long
and short inventory positions. Consistent with the prediction of GM that higher price uncertainty
should command a higher liquidity premium, table A.8 reports double sorts on SV close
t and EOD
VIX and shows that the OD returns are amplified in states of higher ex-ante volatility but only
following market sell-offs. Finally, table A.9 confirms high frequency return predictability arising
at the opening of European financial markets via projections onto SV close
t .

Insert figure A.6, figure A.7, table A.8 and table A.9 here

From inventory models we know that order flow predicts returns. However, the more liquid a
market is, the shorter the period of predictability should be because liquidity providers can quickly
trade imbalances away. In illiquid markets, such as corporate bonds, you can observe predictability
over days. For the e-mini, negatively autocorrelated return predictability usually only lasts a
couple of minutes. For example, figure A.8 displays 5 minute predictability regressions of returns
on lagged signed volume for lags out to one hour. Only the first 5-minute lag is significantly
negative. The bottom panel shows this pattern shows up in returns at the same frequency. What
makes predictability by the order imbalance at the closing of U.S. trading hours special, is that the
volumes transacted are much larger than those traded in the subsequent hours. Therefore, a market
maker providing immediacy in this market is faced with a (potentially) large order imbalance at
the end of the day that will take a long(er) time to trade away overnight, creating a longer-horizon
return predictability overnight. Indeed, this is precisely the fundamental assumption of Grossman-
Miller style models: market makers have to absorb excess order flow in the near term in the hope
of new traders arriving at some point in the future.

Insert figure A.8 here

A.3. Grossman and Miller (1988) Review
There exists a risk free asset (cash), B, with a zero rate of return, and a risky futures contract that
pays S3 at date t = 3 where S3 is conditionally normally distributed. Public information about S3
arrives before trading in period 1 and again before trading in period 2:
S3 = S2 + ϵ3 = S1 + ϵ2 + ϵ3 = µ + ϵ2 + ϵ3, (A.1)
where news shocks ϵ2, ϵ3 ∼ N(0, σ2
t ).
3
=== PAGE 61 ===
t=0 ID
EOD
t=1 ON t=2
EU
LO
t=3
Trading Periods
Assume there are N competitive market makers ( M M) with a CARA utility function and
identical risk aversions α. At t = 0 dealers hold a non-zero cash position but a zero position in the
risky asset: qM Mn
0 = 0. In period t = 1, a representative intraday liquidity trader ( ID ), who holds
an initial endowment of qID
0 futures contracts, executes a transaction of qID
1 contracts. Dealers
provide immediacy at t = 1 by trading with the ID agent and next period t = 2 dealers meet a
representative overnight liquidity trader (ON ), who trades an offsetting amount. Denote the initial
endowments of the ID and ON trader as qID
0 = I = −qON
0 . Demand for immediacy thus arises
because the liquidity demand by non-market-maker traders in period 1 is asynchronous with the
liquidity supplied by overnight liquidity traders that arrive in period 2. The ID liquidity trader
thus faces the risk of delaying execution until one period later, or, offloading some of that trade
now to the market markets who start with zero inventory but are willing to carry some inventory
in exchange for a liquidity premium (expected transaction return).
The problem of determining equilibrium quantities and prices is solved backwards in time. At
t = 2, agent i ∈ {M M1, . . . M Mn, ID, ON} maximizes their expected utility subject to their budget
constraints
max
qi
2
E2

− exp(−αW i
3)

(A.2)
W i
2 = Bi
2 + qi
2S2 = Bi
1 + qi
1S2 (A.3)
W i
3 = Bi
2 + qi
2S3 (A.4)
= W i
2 + qi
2(S3 − S2), (A.5)
where the expectation is taken conditional on the information set realized at datet = 2. Eliminating
the cash position from the problem is equivalent to
max
qi
2
α(W i
2 + qi
2(E2[S3] − S2)) − 1
2 (αqi
2σt)2. (A.6)
The first order condition is
q∗,i
2 = E2[S3] − S2
ασ2
t
(A.7)
¯q∗,i
2 = E2[S3] − S2
ασ2
t
− qi
0, (A.8)
where in the second line we have written the first order condition in ‘excess demand’ terms
¯qi
t = qi
t − qi
0. (A.9)
4
=== PAGE 62 ===
Market clearing in period 2 gives us:
0 =
X
i
¯qi
2 =
 E2[S3] − S2
ασ2
t
− I

| {z }
¯q∗,ID
2
+N ·
 E2[S3] − S2
ασ2
t

| {z }
¯q∗,M M
2
+
 E2[S3] − S2
ασ2
t
+ I

| {z }
¯q∗,ON
2
. (A.10)
Moving backwards one period, at t = 1, the portfolio choice problem is now solved by the set of
agents i ∈ {M M1, . . . M Mn, ID} and given by
max
qi
1
E1

− exp(−αW i
2)

(A.11)
W i
2 = Bi
1 + qi
1S2 (A.12)
W i
1 = Bi
1 + qi
1S1 = Bi
0 + qi
0S1, (A.13)
which is equivalent to
max
qi
1
α(W i
1 + qi
1(E1[S2] − S1)) − 1
2 (αqi
1σt)2. (A.14)
The first order condition in excess demand terms is given by
¯q∗,i
1 = E1[S2] − S1
ασ2
t
− qi
0 = µ − S1
ασ2
t
− qi
0. (A.15)
Imposing market clearing in period t = 1 and remembering qM M
0 = 0 and qID
0 = I
¯qID
1 + N qM M
1 = 0 (A.16)
(N + 1)µ − S1
ασ2
t
= I, (A.17)
and so the equilibrium clearing price is given by
S1 = µ − Iσ2
t
α
N + 1. (A.18)
At this point, it is worth making clear that the ID agent does not offload their entire initial position
to the M M. Substituting the equilibrium price back into the optimal demands we see
q∗,M M
1 = I
N + 1 (A.19)
¯q∗,ID
1 = −N q∗,M M
1 = − N I
N + 1 (A.20)
q∗,ID
1 = I −N I
N + 1. (A.21)
The larger the number of dealers present, the greater is the optimal initial position that is imme-
diately traded. For example, with the introduction of a single EOD M M, 50% of the initial order
imbalance will be carried overnight by the M M. In the CME e-mini market, on average since
2009, there are more than 30 dealers continually posting quotes at the best bid and ask, implying
that 96% of imbalances, conditional on a liquidity event, will be absorbed end-of-day and carried
5
=== PAGE 63 ===
overnight.
Now, define the return RON = ( S2 − S1)/S1 which compensates the dealer for holding inven-
tory between t = 1 → t = 2. Then, from (A.17) and using σ2
t = V ar1[S2] = S2
1 V ar[S2/S1] =
S2
1 V ar[RON ] = S2
1 σ2
R,t, we have
(N + 1)E1[S2] − S1
αS2
1 σ2
R,t
= I (A.22)
⇔ E1[S2] − S1
S1
= S1I ×σ2
R,t × α
N + 1, (A.23)
which shows that expected overnight return are comprised of
E1[RON ] = Dollar OrderImbalance × ReturnVariance ×
Risk Bearing
Capacity
−1
. (A.24)
From RON = (S2 − S1)/S1, we can also consider the conditional covariance of the overnight return
and the intraday order imbalance (from the perspective of period t = 0 such that S1I is random):
cov0[S1I, RON ] = −var0 (S1I) σ2
R,t × α
N + 1, (A.25)
which shows that the size of the reversal following the date t = 1 imbalance is larger when
• dollar order imbalance is larger (more variable)
• conditional variance is larger
• dealer risk bearing capacity is smaller
While the size of the price reversal above is variable, the speed of the reversal happens very fast
and always within one period. This is because qID
0 = I = −qON
0 . Relaxing this assumption one can
solve for the case qID
0 = I = −∆qON
0 . The case of ∆ > 1 implies a large overnight demand while
the case ∆ < 1 implies a small overnight demand. It is straightforward to solve this model and we
find that lower overnight demand will increase the magnitude of return reversals but the speed of
mean reversion (between t = 0 and t = 3) is slower. Thus, lower overnight demand implies that
overnight return reversals are not completed until later in the overnight session.
We now turn to the potential relationship between dealer risk bearing capacity and return
variance. Keeping fixed the number of dealers, we can endogenize dealer risk aversion by incorpo-
rating a value-at-risk (VaR) constraint into the market maker’s problem, as is done, for example, in
Danıelsson, Shin, and Zigrand (2004); Adrian and Shin (2010, 2014a) and the subsequent literature.
More specifically, we modify the optimization problem (A.14) to include a VaR constraint, so that
the market makers solve
max
qM Mi
1
− α
 
W M Mi
1 + qM Mi
1 (E1[S2] − S1)

+ 1
2 (αqM Mi
1 σt)2 (A.26)
s.t.
¯p ≥ P1

W M Mi
1 + qM Mi
1 (E1[S2] − S1)| {z }
=E1
h
W M Mi
2
i
−W M Mi
2 ≥ VaR

 . (A.27)
6
=== PAGE 64 ===
That is, the market maker maximizes expected utility of providing inter-period liquidity (as in A.14)
but now subject to the probability of losses larger than the permitted value-at-risk (VaR) being
lower than a pre-specified permitted probability ¯p. Denote by Φ ( ·) the distribution function of the
standard normal. Then we can rewrite (A.27) as
Φ
 
−VaR
σW M Mi
2
!
≤ ¯p,
or, equivalently,
σ2
W M Mi
2
≤
 VaR
Φ−1 (1 − ¯p)
2
≡ ¯v. (A.28)
Here, σW M Mi
2
is the volatility of period 2 wealth, given period 1 information, which, for the market
makers, is given by σW M Mi
2
= qM Mi
1 σt. Denoting by αλt/2 the Lagrange multiplier on the simplified
VaR constraint (A.28), we can thus rewrite the market makers’ optimization problem as
max
qM Mi
1
α
 
W M Mi
1 + qM Mi
1 (E1[S2] − S1)

− 1
2 (αqM Mi
1 σt)2 − αλt
2

¯v −
 
qM Mi
1 σt
2
(A.29)
0 = αλt
2

¯v −
 
qM Mi
1 σt
2
. (A.30)
Thus, in the presence of a VaR constraint, the optimal demand by a market maker is given by
q∗,M M
1 = µ − S1
(α + λt) σ2
t
, (A.31)
and the market maker’s effective risk aversion becomes α + λt. For a given level of the permitted
value-at-risk and permitted probability ¯p, increases in volatility tighten the value-at-risk constraint,
raising the effective risk aversion of value-at-risk constrained market makers. Similarly, if the
permitted value-at-risk is given as a fraction of equity – so that VaR = φW M Mi
1 – rather than as a
dollar amount, the value-at-risk constraint is tighter when market maker equity declines.
The framework above suggests that value-at-risk may serve as a reasonable proxy for market
maker capital commitments to the trade. Value-at-risk is a measure of economic capital, that is,
the capital required to absorb losses in excess of expected loss due to current risks. As noted
in, for example, the BCBS white paper on “Range of practices and issues in economic capital
frameworks”:40
Economic capital was originally developed by banks as a tool for capital allocation and
performance assessment.
In other words, banks use notions of economic capital to determine the composition of the asset side
of their balance sheets, both from the perspective of the relative size of different lines of business
as well as from the perspective of allocating to business units within each line of business. We thus
view that using a measure of economic capital as being appropriate in the context of evaluating
market maker risk bearing capacity. Although bank capital regulation has famously evolved over our
sample period, the major regulatory changes have a limited impact on economic capital as it relates
40https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs152.pdf
7
=== PAGE 65 ===
to equity futures since both the futures and the underlying basket of securities are exchange-traded
throughout our sample period, and are on-balance-sheet items for supervised institutions. 41
More specifically, we focus on the equity VaR as opposed to the total VaR of reporting insti-
tutions. Conversations that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York conducted with major market
participants following the implementation of post-crisis banking regulation suggest that large finan-
cial institutions allow different business lines to make day-to-day allocation decisions independently,
as long as the overall economic capital allocated to that business line (and, indeed, business unit) is
not exhausted. Thus, for example, the equity futures “desk” makes day-to-day trading decisions in-
dependent of the Treasury desk. We thus view using equity VaR as balancing the desired definition
of what constitutes a market maker in the market against the feasibility of granularity available in
the data.
Acknowledging that our calculation is by its nature an approximation, we note that, even if the
true economic capital allocated to the e-mini futures market is 10 times higher, our relative risk
aversion estimate is comfortably within the range previously estimated in the literature.
Completing the derivation, the modified market clear condition in equation A.16 becomes
 µ − S1
ασ2
t

+ N
 µ − S1
(α + λt)σ2
t

= I (A.32)
from which the equilibrium EOD price is now given by
S1 = µ − Iσ2
t
 α2 + αλt
N (α + λt) + α

(A.33)
from which we identify the modified risk bearing capacity as
RBC t = N (α + λt) + α
α2 + αλt
(A.34)
Then from
∂RBC t
∂α = − 1
(α + λ)2 − N
α2 (A.35)
∂RBC t
∂λ = − 1
(α + λ)2 (A.36)
we see the sensitivity of RBC t w.r.t risk aversion is strictly larger (in magnitude) compared to the
non-constrained case, adjusted by a term that is the sensitivity of RBC w.r.t the probability of the
constraint binding. The expected overnight return becomes
Et[RON ] = Dollar OrderImbalance × ReturnVariance × RBC
−1
t (A.37)
and from equations A.35 and A.36 it is straightforward to show that expected overnight returns are
strictly increasing in both risk aversion and the tightness of the dealer constraint.
41Post-crisis changes to capital regulation had the biggest impact on over-the-counter, non-centrally cleared, off-balance-
sheet securities.
8
=== PAGE 66 ===
A.4. Alternative Explanations
In this subsection we link CRSP, Computstat and IBES datasets for S&P 500 firms to build in-
traday and overnight earnings surprises, and consider international macro announcements from
Bloomberg, and central bank announcements sourced from Bloomberg and central bank websites.
We also exploit tick-by-tick trades and quotes on VIX futures ( V X) sourced from Refinitiv and
complemented with data from CBOE.
A. Volatility Risk
Figure A.11 (a) depicts average realized intraday volatility (squared log returns) from 1998.1–
2020.12 sampled at a 1-minute frequency. The intraday volatility displays the well-known U-shaped
pattern for Asian, European and US trading hours where volatility is high at the beginning and
at the end of each trading period Andersen, Bondarenko, Kyle, and Obizhaeva (2018). Across
trading periods, the level of volatility is lowest during Asian trading hours and highest during US
trading hours, relative to the average trading volume across the 3 periods. Comparing average
levels for each session, we find that US hours volatility is more than twice as large as Asian hours
volatility and therefore considerably larger than estimates of return volatility using close-to-close
prices. The large spike in volatility at 8:30 is caused by the spike in volume observed just after
US macro announcements. Figure A.11(b) plots time series of the realized volatility for each of the
three trading periods. The volatility is always lowest during Asian hours and highest during US
hours but the difference has diminished over time as trading volume in the overnight session has
picked up. The 3 time series are highly positively correlated, indicating that volatility increases on
the same days for all three trading periods. More importantly, we do not observe an obvious link
between realised quantities of risk and returns.
[Insert figure A.11 here]
B. Overnight Liquidity
To measure liquidity risk we construct hourly estimates of 1) Kyle (1985) lambda (based on returns
sampled at the 1-min frequency), 2) the Amihud price impact measure and 3) the bid-ask spread.
Figure A.12 depicts the average intraday patterns of these measures as well as their time series for
the Asian, European and U.S. trading hours. As expected, intraday illiquidity is lowest during U.S.
trading hours where the trading activity is highest and illiquidity is highest during Asian hours
when the trading activity is at its lowest. The bid-ask spread is very close to the minimum tick
size (0.25 index points) at all times during the trading day. All liquidity measures experience large
changes throughout the sample period. Most notably, the overnight illiquidity (Asian and European
hours) has decreased strongly as overnight trading activity has picked up, and today is much closer
to the illiquidity level in regular U.S. trading hours. Secondly, the illiquidity increases during times
of crises, as one would expect.
Considering all three measures, we do not observe intraday patterns which could rationalize
the OD returns with theories of liquidity risk. We see average intraday bid-ask spreads are almost
always trading at the minimum tick size, equal to 0.25 index points. The spread is only significantly
higher after 16.30 when trading resumes after the maintenance break and volumes are close to zero
(see figure 8). The jumps in the bid-ask spread at 8:30 and 10:00 corresponds to the U.S. macro
announcements which are released at these times.
9
=== PAGE 67 ===
In addition, since we observe the aggregate limit order book for the market, we can also measure
intraday illiquidity by computing the depth of the market. Market depth is computed as the number
of contracts available in each 5 minute interval, and is reported for the first five levels on each side
of the order book. Figure A.14 shows the intraday depth averaged across all days in the 2009.1-
2020.12 sample. Here we observe that, at each level, the depth of the bid is equal to the depth
of the ask. We also note there are three depth regimes differentiated by Asia, European and U.S.
trading hours. Depth is flat in Asian hours and rises throughout European hours.
At U.S. open, depth increases steeply, remains relatively flat during the regular U.S. hours and
then spikes at U.S. close before dropping in the overnight market. However, we also see that the
overnight market remains highly liquid. For example, until 2.00 at the top level (L1) there are, on
average, 100 contracts available, which in dollar terms with the S&P level at 2000 is equal to $10
million at the bid or ask. Considering all levels, L1 - L5 depth rises to $80 million. Indeed, a highly
liquid overnight market is consistent with the large overnight volumes traded in this market, which
as noted in the introduction, have averaged in excess of $15 billion daily.

Insert figures A.12 and A.14 here

C. Overnight News
We now consider if overnight news released after the U.S. cash market close are not immediately
incorporated into prices during Asian hours but instead accumulate and are resolved at European
open when trading volumes increase. Indeed, a large fraction of U.S. corporate earnings announce-
ments are released after U.S. market close. Furthermore, Asian and European macro or central
bank information released during the U.S. overnight session may signal news about U.S. growth
prospects. Explanations for the overnight drift along these lines are related to a literature that
shows conditional risk premia are higher on days prior to and on days of macroeconomic announce-
ments.42 We study this conjecture by examining hour-by-hour returns conditional on U.S. earnings
announcements., and U.S., Japanese or European macro- and central bank announcements.
C.1. Earnings Announcements
We test if firm-specific announcements predict intraday returns. Previous literature (see e.g. Bernard
and Thomas, 1989; Sadka, 2006, and the subsequent literature) has documented a positive (nega-
tive) drift in stock prices of individual firms following a positive (negative) earnings announcement
surprise. The earnings data is obtained from I/B/E/S and Compustat. Following Hirshleifer, Lim,
and Teoh (2009), for each firm i and on day t we define the earnings surprise as
ESi,t = Ai,t − Fi,t−
Pi,t−
,
where A is the actual earnings per share (EPS) as reported by the firm, F is the most recent median
forecast of the EPS and P is the stock price of the firm at the end of the quarter. As I/B/E/S
updates the professional forecasters’ expectations on a monthly basis, the shock is the difference
between the actual earnings and forecasters expected earnings approximately 1 month prior to the
announcement date. Scaling the shock A − F by the stock price implies that firm shocks are equally
42In the context of stock returns, Savor and Wilson (2014) show that equity risk premia are consistently larger on U.S.
inflation, GDP and non-farm announcements days. Lucca and Moench (2015), on the other hand, document a drift in the
U.S. stock market which precedes FOMC announcements.
10
=== PAGE 68 ===
weighted.43 We define the daily earnings surprise of the S&P 500 index, ESt, as the daily sum of
all ESi.44
Figure A.15 plots the time series of ESt. The shocks are periodic on a quarterly basis and
generally positive ( ∼ 75% of all shocks are positive). Notably, we see large negative shocks during
the financial crisis and almost exclusively positive shocks following the crisis.
To test this conjecture formally, we sort all trading days based onESt. We choose only announce-
ments that are published after U.S. close (16:00 ET). This is because the effect of announcements
published early in the day should be incorporated into the price on that day, while announcements
that occur after CT Ohours could affect returns in these hours. Table A.13 reports the average
returns for day t + 1 after sorting on ESt. We sort all trading days into 5 groups based on ESt. In
group 1, ESt < 0. For group 2-4, ESt is positive and increasing by group. Group 5 is for days where
ESt is zero, i.e. not a single firm announced their earnings prior to these days (this was ∼ 46%
of all trading days. The table contains a number of interesting findings. First, we see a strong
monotonic positive relation between earnings shocks and CT Creturns across groups. Second, no
news days have the highest CTC return, equal to 4.57 % p.a, with a t-statistic of 1.86, and in this
sense “no news is good news”. Third, negative shocks are not incorporated into the price until the
U.S. market opens, while positive shocks are incorporated immediately during the CT Operiod.
However, most importantly for the focus of this paper, we do not detect a post close information
effect: the OD is not driven by earnings announcements as it is positive and significantly different
from zero for all 5 set of days.
[Insert figure A.15 and table A.13 here]
C.2. Macro and Central Banks
From Bloomberg’s Economic Calendar we collect dates and times for
• U.S.: Non-farm Payrolls; CPI Ex Food and Energy; GDP QoQ.
• EU: Unemployment Rate; PPI MoM; Industrial Production SA MoM.
• U.K.: Jobless Claims Change; CPI Ex Food and Energy; QoQ.
• Japan: Jobless Rate; PPI MoM; Industrial Production MoM.
Announcement times are generally close to 8:30 ET in the U.S., 2:00 ET in the Eurozone, 4:30 ET
in the U.K, and 19:50 ET in Japan.
For central banks, we collect announcement dates and times from the websites of the following
central banks: ( i) FOMC; (ii) the ECB; ( iii) the BoE; ( iv) the BoJ. FOMC target rate announce-
ments are released at or very close to 14:15 ET. ECB target announcements are at 6:45 ET, followed
by a press conference at 7:30 ET. BoE announcement days often coincide with ECB days and the
announcements are at 7:00 ET. Finally, BoJ announcements do not occur at a regular time but
target rate decisions are generally announced between 22.00 and 1.00 ET. Our sample period is
January 1998 to December 2020.
We test the effect of announcements on hourly subinterval returns in a regression framework
with dummy variables which take a ‘1’ on days with an announcement and ‘0’ otherwise. More
specifically, the dummy takes a value of 1 if the announcement occurs within the current calendar
43EPS is earnings per share outstanding, implying that EPS/ P is earnings per market cap.
44We also test specifications of ES S&P 500
t where firms are value weighted and result are similar.
11
=== PAGE 69 ===
day. Thus, Japanese and European macro announcements are contemporaneous with the overnight
return, while U.S. announcements occur subsequent to the overnight returns. The regression we
estimate is
rH
t,n = an + bn
1 1 U.K. + bn
2 1 EU + bn
3 1 JP + bn
4 1 U.S. + εn
t , (A.38)
where 1 i is a macro or central bank announcement dummy for country i.
Panel (a) of table A.14 reports estimates for macro announcements. The intercept during the
OD hour (2:00–3:00) is estimated to be 1.52 bps with a t-statistic of 5.98, i.e. the drift is present on
non-announcement days and thus not driven by macro announcements. Furthermore, none of the
announcement dummies are statistically different from the non-announcement days in this hour.
The U.K. macro dummy is economically large and significant negative at the 10% level at 3:00
(which is 8:00 in London). More generally, we fail to detect an announcement effect in any of
the overnight hours. U.S. announcements occur at 8:30 and indeed we see a large positive return
of 3.22 bps with a t-statistics of 2.29. Panel (b) of table A.14 reports estimates for central bank
announcements. Again, the intercept is unaffected at 2:00-3:00 and we obtain an estimate of 1.40
bps with a t-statistic of 6.52. The BoE dummy is economically large and marginally significantly
positive between 4:00 - 5:00 consistent with central bank announcement premium. The FOMC
dummy is large but insignificant.
[Insert table A.14 here]
Summarizing, we fail to detect a relationship between the overnight drift and ( i) earnings an-
nouncements that are released after the close of the cash market, during Asian hours, or ( ii)
overnight news from Asian or European central bank or macro announcements; thus, it is unlikely
that the overnight drift is driven by risk compensation related to announcement premia.
C.3. Resolution of Uncertainty
The results directly above suggest that the overnight drift is unlikely to be related to an information
effect. Recent literature (see e.g. Ai and Bansal (2018) for the theoretical argument and Hu, Pan,
Wang, and Zhu (2019) for suggestive empirical evidence), however, has argued that resolution
uncertainty, as measured by changes in the VIX, ahead of macroeconomic announcements could
explain the pre-announcement drift of Lucca and Moench (2015). More recently, in work subsequent
to ours, Bondarenko and Muravyev (2020) postulate uncertainty resolution at the open of European
markets as a possible explanation for the central empirical result of our paper (figure 2).
To investigate this hypothesis, we consider changes in volatility by computing intraday and
overnight VIX futures ( V X) returns. Indeed, investors wanting to manage volatility risks around
the clock can now trade VIX futures ( V X) contracts in all time zones. V Xfutures are open nearly
23 hours a day, 5 days a week, trading electronically on the CBOE futures exchange. V Xis closed
daily from 16:15 to 16:30 and from 17:00 to 18:00 ET. On Sundays, they start at 6:00 ET. V X
futures trade with a dollar value of $1000 × the level of the VIX Index. Regular expirations are on
the Wednesday 30 days before the corresponding S&P 500 option expiration. Due to holidays the
option expiration date may be irregular and settle on the preceding Tuesday. V Xfutures contracts
trade with monthly expirations and we consider a position that trades the front month contract
and rolls into the next-to-delivery contract on the Monday preceding expiration Wednesdays and
thus avoiding settlement returns.
Panel (a) of figure A.16 displays the average cumulative 5-minute log returns for the front
month V Xcontract. The intraday V Xreturns are relatively flat during the U.S. hours. At the
12
=== PAGE 70 ===
close of regular U.S. trading hours, in the run up to the maintenance break,V Xreturns are strongly
negative, exceeding -80% p.a.45 During regular Asian trading hoursV Xreturns rebound, generating
annualized returns of 50% between 18:00 and 1:00. At the opening of European marketsV Xreturns
are negative, equal to 50% p.a between 2:00 and 4:00 Panel (a) of table A.15 reports average
overnight hourly V Xreturns, measured in basis points, which are highly statistically significant
around European open.
Focusing on V Xreturns at European open, one can easily rationalize a contemporaneous neg-
ative co-movement with ES returns (absent a resolution of uncertainty conjecture) in terms of the
‘leverage effect’, which is the well known empirical fact that equity volatility tends to fall (rise)
when equity returns are positive (negative). A common explanation for this phenomenon is due to
Black (1976) and Christie (1982) who argue that companies become mechanically more leveraged
as equity prices decline relative value of their debt and, as a result, their equity values become
more volatile as in Merton (1974). Panel (b) of figure A.16 demonstrates the leverage effect in in-
traday data by computing the intraday 1-minute correlations between ES and V Xfutures returns
(rES
t × rV X
t ) for intervals where we observe quote updates and averaging these over all days in our
sample. During both overnight and intraday periods the correlation is close to -80% which demon-
strates that economic interpretations of resolution of uncertainty based on a contemporaneous VIX
relationship is limited: “correlation does not imply causation”.
[Insert figure A.16 here]
More interesting, is the question of whether end-of-day order imbalances in one futures contract
predict overnight returns in the other contract. Table A.15 answers this question by estimating
two sets of high frequency predictability regressions. Panel (a) reports multivariate regressions with
e-mini returns on the left and EOD ES and V Xorder imbalances on the right hand side
ES rH
t,n = µn + βESSV
n ES SV close
t−1 + βV XSV
n V X SVclose
t−1 + ϵt,n, for n = 1, ...,12,
while panel (b) replaces the left hand sides with V Xreturns
V X rH
t,n = µn + βV XSV
n V X SVclose
t−1 + βESSV
n ES SV close
t−1 + ϵt,n, for n = 1, ...,12.
Summarizing the table, while ES imbalances at U.S. close predict subsequent overnight returns in
both the ES and the V Xcontracts, V Ximbalances only predict overnight V Xreturns. Overnight
ES returns between 2:00 and 3:00 are forecastable by closing ES order imbalance after controlling
for V Xorder imbalances. V Xreturns, on the other hand, are predicted by ES order imbalances
between 2:00 and 3:00 and then subsequently we observe some marginally significant predictability
by V Xorder imbalances between 4:00 and 6:00, albeit with positive and negative signs.
Thus, while ES and V Xreturns are contemporaneously mechanically linked through the lever-
age effect, overnight returns in both markets are predicted by end-of-day imbalances in the ES ,
making the resolution of uncertainty hypothesis an unlikely explanation for the overnight drift.
[Insert tables A.15 here]
45Volumes between 16:15 and 18:00 are very low and we do not report returns or correlations for this period of the day.
13
=== PAGE 71 ===
A.5. Tables
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Mean 0 .45 0 .16 − 0.04 − 0.06 − 0.20 − 0.06 0 .54 0 .50 1 .51 0 .39 − 0.14 0 .14 0 .39 − 0.01 0 .28
t-stat 1 .08 0 .73 − 0.14 − 0.22 − 0.85 − 0.28 2 .41 2 .29 5 .78 1 .32 − 0.47 0 .54 1 .47 − 0.05 0 .75
p-value 0 .28 0 .46 0 .89 0 .83 0 .39 0 .78 0 .016 0 .022 9 .8 · 10 − 9 0.19 0 .64 0 .59 0 .14 0 .96 0 .45
median 0 .00 0 .14 0 .08 0 .10 0 .15 0 .14 0 .17 0 .44 0 .77 0 .05 0 .31 0 .29 0 .35 0 .58 − 0.22
Sdev 13 .40 14 .59 16 .92 16 .22 15 .65 12 .59 13 .74 13 .67 17 .21 22 .32 20 .63 17 .89 18 .69 19 .40 28 .51
Skew 1 .16 − 0.53 − 1.39 − 3.46 − 5.42 − 0.83 5 .96 − 0.54 0 .88 0 .15 − 0.83 − 0.92 1 .23 0 .49 1 .44
Kurt 25 .66 33 .90 37 .49 85 .42 121 .25 28 .07 152 .23 28 .61 31 .58 15 .26 20 .24 17 .54 38 .40 47 .81 47 .59
(a)
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18
Mean − 1 . 33 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 27 0 . 48 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 13 0 . 52 − 2 . 65 − 0 . 61
t-stat − 2 . 96 − 0 . 15 − 0 . 61 1 . 28 − 0 . 27 − 0 . 29 0 . 87 − 0 . 96 − 1 . 08
p-value 0 . 0031 0 . 88 0 . 54 0 . 20 0 . 79 0 . 77 0 . 39 0 . 34 0 . 28
median − 0 . 57 1 . 36 1 . 12 0 . 87 1 . 18 0 . 78 1 . 41 0 . 78 − 0 . 63
Sdev 34 . 05 41 . 83 32 . 95 28 . 48 30 . 40 35 . 83 49 . 42 24 . 97 14 . 84
Skew − 0 . 28 − 0 . 04 − 0 . 38 − 0 . 09 0 . 33 0 . 28 1 . 27 − 3 . 95 1 . 19
Kurt 11 . 97 9 . 78 10 . 44 20 . 56 20 . 74 13 . 32 30 . 95 26 . 23 14 . 10
(b)
Table A.1. Summary statistics: returns computed from trades
Summary statistics for S&P 500 e-mini futures hourly returns occurring overnight. Returns are computed from volume-weighted average
prices. Panel (a) displays overnight hours and panel (b) displays intraday hours. Mean, medians and standard deviations are displayed
in basis point terms. Sample period is January 1998 — December 2020.
14
=== PAGE 72 ===
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Mean 0 .16 0 .30 0 .45 − 0.02 0 .04 0 .12 0 .25 0 .44 1 .42 0 .42 − 0.23 − 0.07 0 .72 − 0.15 0 .30
t-stat 0 .42 1 .10 1 .52 − 0.09 0 .22 0 .71 1 .29 2 .13 5 .43 1 .22 − 0.66 − 0.24 2 .14 − 0.40 0 .55
p-value 0 .68 0 .27 0 .13 0 .93 0 .83 0 .48 0 .20 0 .033 6 .1 · 10 − 8 0.22 0 .51 0 .81 0 .033 0 .69 0 .58
median 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .95 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00
Sdev 22 .18 15 .47 16 .83 11 .98 11 .70 9 .73 11 .43 11 .57 15 .37 21 .52 20 .10 17 .87 18 .66 20 .84 31 .58
Skew − 1.07 1 .11 0 .53 0 .64 − 2.68 1 .14 1 .58 − 0.51 − 0.03 − 0.24 − 0.71 − 0.80 1 .80 1 .93 − 0.44
Kurt 91 .88 44 .88 67 .03 31 .11 78 .24 33 .47 39 .93 39 .76 31 .88 19 .14 16 .50 18 .77 21 .34 64 .84 22 .42
(a) Overnight
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18
Mean − 2 . 24 − 0 . 28 − 1 . 17 0 . 02 0 . 31 − 0 . 26 1 . 05 − 0 . 44 − 0 . 31
t-stat − 3 . 27 − 0 . 32 − 1 . 82 0 . 04 0 . 51 − 0 . 36 1 . 12 − 1 . 06 − 1 . 74
p-value 0 . 0011 0 . 75 0 . 075 0 . 97 0 . 61 0 . 72 0 . 26 0 . 29 0 . 081
median − 1 . 13 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 88 0 . 00 0 . 00
Sdev 39 . 09 48 . 14 36 . 43 31 . 75 34 . 93 42 . 50 58 . 38 23 . 36 10 . 35
Skew − 0 . 67 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 32 − 1 . 21 0 . 90 0 . 54 1 . 10 − 1 . 84 − 0 . 73
Kurt 13 . 02 9 . 99 8 . 65 20 . 16 19 . 55 11 . 88 24 . 75 17 . 37 55 . 42
(b) Intraday
Table A.2. Summary statistics: January 1998 — December 2010
Summary statistics for S&P 500 e-mini futures hourly returns. Returns are computed from mid quotes at the top of the order book.
Panel (a) displays overnight hours and panel (b) displays intraday hours. Mean, medians and standard deviations are displayed in basis
point terms. t-statistics testing again the null of zero returns are computed from HAC robust standard errors. Sample period is January
1998 — December 2010.
15
=== PAGE 73 ===
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Mean − 1.26 0 .42 − 0.23 0 .14 − 0.14 − 0.06 0 .75 0 .42 1 .55 0 .26 0 .11 0 .44 0 .46 − 0.01 0 .22
t-stat − 2.34 1 .52 − 0.72 0 .38 − 0.48 − 0.26 2 .56 1 .74 4 .65 0 .62 0 .27 1 .30 1 .27 − 0.03 0 .47
p-value 0 .019 0 .13 0 .47 0 .70 0 .63 0 .79 0 .011 0 .082 3 .4 · 10 − 6 0.54 0 .79 0 .19 0 .20 0 .98 0 .64
median 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00
Sdev 28 .09 13 .81 16 .64 17 .57 15 .69 11 .09 13 .97 12 .43 16 .29 21 .38 19 .02 17 .00 18 .49 18 .32 24 .62
Skew − 5.27 − 1.28 − 2.10 − 5.10 − 8.46 − 2.24 11 .31 − 0.12 2 .55 0 .37 − 1.10 0 .09 0 .91 − 2.92 4 .95
Kurt 76 .92 30 .51 39 .21 120 .04 206 .83 35 .56 300 .85 28 .13 35 .46 13 .93 30 .06 21 .34 91 .21 49 .21 117 .26
(a) Overnight
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18
Mean 0 . 05 − 0 . 22 0 . 99 0 . 92 − 0 . 75 0 . 21 0 . 06 0 . 59 − 0 . 59
t-stat 0 . 08 − 0 . 34 1 . 78 1 . 83 − 1 . 61 0 . 38 0 . 08 1 . 76 − 4 . 03
p-value 0 . 94 0 . 74 0 . 075 0 . 067 0 . 11 0 . 70 0 . 93 0 . 079 5 . 6 · 10
− 5
median 1 . 19 1 . 71 2 . 10 1 . 26 1 . 15 0 . 95 0 . 94 1 . 20 − 0 . 46
Sdev 31 . 77 33 . 16 27 . 78 25 . 41 23 . 57 27 . 69 38 . 78 17 . 19 7 . 33
Skew − 1 . 66 0 . 11 − 0 . 36 1 . 42 − 1 . 32 − 0 . 82 1 . 54 − 1 . 68 0 . 07
Kurt 35 . 71 9 . 81 14 . 10 33 . 83 13 . 53 16 . 66 42 . 14 28 . 75 60 . 80
(b) Intraday
Table A.3. Summary statistics: January 2011 — December 2020
Summary statistics for S&P 500 e-mini futures hourly returns. Returns are computed from mid quotes at the top of the order book.
Panel (a) displays overnight hours and panel (b) displays intraday hours. Mean, medians and standard deviations are displayed in basis
point terms. t-statistics testing again the null of zero returns are computed from HAC robust standard errors. Sample period is January
2011 — December 2020.
16
=== PAGE 74 ===
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Mean −0.46 0 .35 0 .15 0 .05 −0.03 0 .04 0 .46 0 .43 1 .48 0 .35 −0.08 0 .15 0 .61 −0.08 0 .26
t-stat −1.43 1 .80 0 .68 0 .25 −0.19 0 .29 2 .77 2 .75 7 .13 1 .33 −0.32 0 .63 2 .46 −0.31 0 .71
p-value 0 .15 0 .072 0 .50 0 .80 0 .85 0 .77 0 .0056 0 .0060 1.1·10−12 0.18 0 .75 0 .53 0 .014 0 .75 0 .48
BY 10% threshold 0.0088 0 .0077 0 .014 0 .023 0 .024 0 .022 0 .0033 0 .0044 0.0011⋆ 0.0099 0 .020 0 .015 0 .0066 0 .021 0 .013
BY 5% threshold 0.0044 0 .0039 0.0072 0.012 0 .012 0 .011 0 .0017 0 .0022 0.00055⋆ 0.0050 0.0099 0.0077 0.0033 0 .011 0 .0066
BY 1% threshold 0.00088 0.00077 0.0014 0.0023 0.0024 0.0022 0.00033 0.00044 0.00011⋆ 0.00099 0.0020 0.0015 0.00066 0.0021 0.0013
(a) Overnight
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18
Mean −1.24 −0.25 −0.23 0 .41 −0.15 −0.06 0 .61 0 .00 −0.43
t-stat −2.60 −0.45 −0.52 1 .07 −0.37 −0.12 0 .99 0 .01 −3.62
p-value 0 .093 0 .66 0 .60 0 .28 0 .71 0 .91 0 .32 1 .00 0 .00030
BY 10% threshold 0.0055 0 .018 0 .017 0 .011 0 .019 0 .025 0 .012 0 .027 0.0022⋆
BY 5% threshold 0.0028 0 .0088 0.0083 0.0055 0.0094 0 .013 0 .0061 0 .013 0.0011⋆
BY 1% threshold 0.00055 0.0018 0.0017 0.0011 0.0019 0.0025 0.0012 0.0026 0.00022
(b) Intraday
Table A.4. Benjamini–Yekutieli Thresholds
The table provides Benjamini–Yekutieli (BY) corrected significance levels (thresholds) for the null hypotheses of the S&P 500 e-mini futures average hourly log
returns being zero. The BY procedure is a method to handle multiple testing problems. Specifically, it aims to control the false discovery rate which is the
expected ratio of the number of type I errors to the total number of rejections of the null. The BY method is a ‘step up’ procedure that computes null specific
thresholds starting from the least significant hypothesis and working up until significant alternative hypotheses are detected. This implies that ever test has a
unique threshold (see Harvey, Liu, and Saretto (2020) for a recent survey of multiple testing procedures in the context of financial economic applications). In
the table, returns are computed from mid quotes at the top of the order book and reported in basis points. Means are displayed in basis point terms. t-statistics
testing again the null of zero returns are computed from HAC robust standard errors. p-values indicate significance levels under a student- t distribution. BY
thresholds are shown at the 10%, 5% and 1% level. A threshold is denoted with a ⋆ if the corresponding p-value of a test is below the given threshold. Panel (a)
displays overnight hours and panel (b) displays intraday hours. Sample period is January 1998 — December 2020.
17
=== PAGE 75 ===
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Monday -3.65 0.67 0.71 0.00 0.15 0.32 -0.30 -0.10 1.54 1.22 0.06 -0.20 0.81 1.29 0.17
t-stat (-2.39) (1.51) (1.50) (0.00) (0.43) (0.99) (-0.93) (-0.27) (3.23) (1.89) (0.11) (-0.40) (1.54) (2.49) (0.21)
Tuesday 0.89 0.75 0.26 0.93 -0.07 0.07 0.51 1.03 1.55 -0.29 -0.88 1.32 1.03 0.28 -0.19
t-stat (1.36) (1.99) (0.61) (2.30) (-0.23) (0.23) (1.61) (2.93) (3.26) (-0.53) (-1.50) (2.59) (1.70) (0.49) (-0.27)
Wednesday -0.15 0.13 -0.12 -0.15 0.13 0.14 0.65 0.01 1.69 0.03 0.34 0.37 0.24 -0.17 -1.03
t-stat (-0.42) (0.30) (-0.27) (-0.37) (0.36) (0.48) (2.17) (0.03) (3.94) (0.04) (0.61) (0.72) (0.42) (-0.28) (-1.24)
Thursday -0.22 1.38 1.41 -0.56 -0.16 -0.23 0.63 0.45 1.32 0.10 0.43 -0.90 0.50 -1.42 0.93
t-stat (-0.57) (2.93) (2.54) (-0.97) (-0.34) (-0.79) (1.76) (1.36) (2.83) (0.17) (0.72) (-1.58) (1.01) (-2.14) (1.06)
Friday 0.62 -1.20 -1.48 0.01 -0.19 -0.10 0.79 0.74 1.28 0.79 -0.36 0.09 0.47 -0.31 1.48
t-stat (1.39) (-2.63) (-2.90) (0.02) (-0.44) (-0.32) (1.43) (1.92) (2.60) (1.28) (-0.63) (0.17) (0.84) (-0.58) (1.39)
(a) Overnight hourly returns
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18
Monday -1.21 0.15 -1.29 0.43 -0.53 -0.00 0.22 -0.08 -0.50
t-stat (-0.92) (0.13) (-1.30) (0.53) (-0.60) (-1.04) (0.14) (-0.13) (-2.42)
Tuesday -0.01 0.03 0.93 -0.58 -0.33 -0.88 -0.36 -0.15 -0.73
t-stat (-0.01) (0.02) (0.99) (-0.70) (-0.40) (-0.79) (-0.25) (-0.24) (-2.15)
Wednesday 0.12 -0.67 1.57 1.15 -0.40 2.09 -2.39 -0.47 -0.56
t-stat (0.12) (-0.56) (1.71) (1.54) (-0.43) (1.85) (-1.58) (-0.81) (-1.79)
Thursday -2.10 0.44 -0.19 0.24 1.38 -0.60 2.12 0.34 -0.30
t-stat (-2.02) (0.34) (-0.20) (0.26) (1.43) (-0.55) (1.43) (0.53) (-1.03)
Friday -3.03 -1.19 -2.28 0.81 -0.88 0.02 3.53 0.37 -0.07
t-stat (-2.76) (-0.99) (-2.24) (0.93) (-1.02) (0.02) (2.62) (0.57) (-1.44)
(b) Intraday hourly returns
Table A.5. Day of week mean returns
Mean returns are estimated for each day of the week by projecting hourly return series on a set of dummy variables, one for each hour
of the day, for all days in the sample. Estimates are in basis points. t-statistics reported in parenthesis are computed from HAC robust
standard errors. Sample period is January 1998 — December 2020.
18
=== PAGE 76 ===
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
January -0.52 0.53 0.43 -0.01 -0.15 -0.39 -0.86 -0.08 1.28 -0.97 0.47 0.56 1.26 -0.12 -0.34
t-stat (-0.45) (0.87) (0.70) (-0.03) (-0.28) (-1.05) (-1.83) (-0.19) (2.05) (-1.07) (0.58) (0.65) (1.63) (-0.15) (-0.28)
February -0.33 1.19 -0.57 0.06 -0.39 -0.43 0.29 1.09 2.06 0.07 -0.90 -0.79 0.51 1.17 -2.14
t-stat (-0.36) (2.09) (-0.69) (0.13) (-0.83) (-1.16) (0.55) (2.82) (2.73) (0.08) (-1.10) (-1.18) (0.66) (1.54) (-1.75)
March -4.49 -0.08 0.08 -1.61 -0.36 -0.10 2.13 0.84 2.13 1.48 -0.08 -0.22 -0.65 -0.44 2.81
t-stat (-2.64) (-0.07) (0.10) (-1.23) (-0.43) (-0.15) (1.84) (1.32) (2.14) (1.47) (-0.06) (-0.23) (-0.55) (-0.40) (1.76)
April -0.87 0.21 -0.10 0.51 0.07 0.17 0.59 0.22 2.40 0.09 -0.28 1.49 0.13 1.72 0.51
t-stat (-0.83) (0.46) (-0.10) (0.88) (0.14) (0.44) (1.21) (0.39) (3.87) (0.10) (-0.37) (2.11) (0.17) (2.16) (0.36)
May -0.34 0.73 0.27 -0.26 0.47 0.04 0.54 0.39 1.11 0.43 -0.60 0.23 -0.27 0.52 -0.92
t-stat (-0.42) (1.40) (0.51) (-0.51) (1.14) (0.11) (1.46) (0.90) (1.91) (0.58) (-0.83) (0.37) (-0.43) (0.72) (-0.88)
June -0.82 0.89 0.51 0.31 0.06 0.25 0.47 0.09 1.92 0.45 -0.64 0.45 -0.09 -0.17 0.45
t-stat (-0.99) (2.11) (0.57) (0.54) (0.09) (0.63) (0.99) (0.18) (2.94) (0.57) (-0.79) (0.70) (-0.14) (-0.25) (0.42)
July -0.34 0.06 -0.25 -0.29 0.79 0.44 -0.50 0.29 1.37 -0.19 0.84 0.19 1.24 1.16 -0.42
t-stat (-0.45) (0.17) (-0.56) (-0.59) (1.73) (1.32) (-1.51) (0.81) (2.57) (-0.26) (1.10) (0.29) (1.81) (1.48) (-0.38)
August -2.12 -0.19 0.32 0.12 -0.21 -0.34 0.62 0.80 0.95 0.51 0.08 -1.03 0.73 -0.02 -0.41
t-stat (-2.35) (-0.46) (0.49) (0.20) (-0.43) (-0.68) (1.44) (1.59) (1.33) (0.52) (0.11) (-1.46) (1.16) (-0.03) (-0.34)
September 0.68 0.11 -0.39 0.38 -0.14 -0.45 0.22 0.62 2.71 -1.24 0.56 0.23 -2.17 -0.98 -0.46
t-stat (0.44) (0.15) (-0.47) (0.53) (-0.26) (-1.01) (0.50) (1.01) (3.63) (-1.11) (0.58) (0.26) (-2.49) (-1.12) (-0.37)
October -2.12 -0.19 0.32 0.12 -0.21 -0.34 0.62 0.80 0.95 0.51 0.08 -1.03 0.73 -0.02 -0.41
t-stat (-2.35) (-0.46) (0.49) (0.20) (-0.43) (-0.68) (1.44) (1.59) (1.33) (0.52) (0.11) (-1.46) (1.16) (-0.03) (-0.34)
November 2.24 0.40 0.03 0.60 -0.08 0.32 1.20 0.07 0.63 1.61 0.04 -0.05 1.64 -1.57 1.70
t-stat (2.04) (0.57) (0.04) (0.84) (-0.11) (0.56) (2.12) (0.14) (0.73) (1.62) (0.04) (-0.06) (1.54) (-1.62) (1.33)
December 2.30 -0.07 0.88 -0.03 -0.44 -0.23 0.75 1.26 1.05 1.48 1.88 0.79 0.27 -1.02 0.56
t-stat (2.56) (-0.09) (1.57) (-0.08) (-0.68) (-0.51) (1.32) (2.61) (2.19) (1.93) (2.62) (1.13) (0.40) (-1.38) (0.53)
(a) Overnight hourly returns
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18
January -1.45 -3.15 -0.82 0.41 1.51 0.94 1.09 -0.31 -0.72
t-stat (-0.81) (-1.57) (-0.56) (0.34) (1.01) (0.62) (0.63) (-0.34) (-1.41)
February -1.12 -0.96 0.55 0.65 -2.05 0.41 0.57 -0.87 -0.36
t-stat (-0.72) (-0.51) (0.35) (0.57) (-1.26) (0.25) (0.29) (-0.96) (-0.00)
March -3.41 4.54 0.97 2.18 -2.69 1.71 1.37 -0.64 -0.82
t-stat (-1.48) (2.13) (0.54) (1.37) (-1.95) (0.90) (0.59) (-0.65) (-1.82)
April -1.04 1.06 -0.17 1.15 -0.15 -1.49 1.15 2.75 0.09
t-stat (-0.77) (0.62) (-0.11) (0.97) (-0.12) (-1.04) (0.70) (2.63) (0.21)
May -0.24 -0.72 0.37 0.66 -0.77 -0.41 0.29 -0.75 -0.55
t-stat (-0.19) (-0.39) (0.29) (0.58) (-0.73) (-0.30) (0.17) (-1.07) (-1.76)
June -0.06 0.17 0.62 -1.63 0.23 -1.44 -1.90 0.34 -0.59
t-stat (-0.04) (0.10) (0.51) (-1.58) (0.20) (-1.01) (-1.26) (0.48) (-2.17)
July -0.60 -1.73 -1.63 -0.88 2.83 -1.01 2.28 -0.66 -0.15
t-stat (-0.46) (-1.02) (-1.00) (-0.78) (2.38) (-0.73) (1.14) (-0.77) (-0.32)
August -1.59 -0.30 -0.94 0.76 1.20 -1.33 -0.87 0.82 -0.49
t-stat (-1.14) (-0.16) (-0.67) (0.62) (1.04) (-0.92) (-0.41) (1.15) (-1.28)
September -3.45 -0.34 0.70 -0.68 0.68 1.22 -0.77 -0.18 -0.12
t-stat (-1.98) (-0.17) (0.48) (-0.53) (0.48) (0.70) (-0.37) (-0.17) (-0.33)
October -1.59 -0.30 -0.94 0.76 1.20 -1.33 -0.87 0.82 -0.49
t-stat (-1.14) (-0.16) (-0.67) (0.62) (1.04) (-0.92) (-0.41) (1.15) (-1.28)
November -1.56 1.24 -0.46 0.06 0.59 1.06 0.68 0.13 -1.26
t-stat (-0.92) (0.68) (-0.32) (0.04) (0.40) (0.55) (0.26) (0.14) (-3.33)
December -0.38 1.37 -1.28 -0.17 -2.48 -0.93 -0.44 -0.03 -0.21
t-stat (-0.24) (0.75) (-0.87) (-0.15) (-1.88) (-0.55) (-0.24) (-0.02) (-0.70)
(b) Intraday hourly returns
Table A.6. Month of year mean returns
Mean returns are estimated for each month of the year by projecting hourly return series on a set
of dummy variables, one for each hour of the day, for all days in the sample. Estimates are in basis
points. t-statistics are computed from HAC robust standard errors. Sample period is January 1998
— December 2020.
19
=== PAGE 77 ===
Hour 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09
Mean −102.69 38 .49 −25.64 7 .58 −27.50 −14.10 27 .03 34 .03 123 .89 −3.92 0 .14 20 .09 12 .63 5 .81 10 .29
t-stat −4.14 1 .85 −1.04 0 .31 −1.21 −0.80 1 .61 1 .95 4 .21 −0.09 0 .00 0 .57 0 .33 0 .12 0 .12
Median −71.00 14 .00 −17.00 −4.00 15 .00 0 .00 3 .00 26 .00 67 .00 −1.00 0 .00 36 .00 27 .00 75 .00 27 .00
Sdev 1 , 496.30 1 , 230.72 1 , 501.57 1 , 473.38 1 , 353.31 1 , 077.16 1 , 019.88 1 , 057.16 1 , 768.44 2 , 721.70 2 , 387.59 2 , 147.20 2 , 245.48 2 , 849.86 4 , 979.66
Skew −1.78 −2.90 −1.07 −1.95 −1.93 −1.22 0 .88 0 .06 −0.52 −0.15 −0.43 −0.44 −0.44 0 .05 0 .23
Kurt 35 .73 84 .00 18 .47 46 .37 42 .41 31 .55 27 .17 17 .53 17 .47 10 .02 12 .51 10 .24 9 .38 14 .11 9 .56
(a) Overnight
Hour 09-10 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18 CTC
Mean −568.13 −709.04 −466.78 −83.86 −278.26 −156.65 −290.89 251 .78 −21.50 −2, 217.19
t-stat −3.04 −2.87 −2.24 −0.49 −1.73 −0.83 −0.99 2 .10 −1.78 −3.27
Median −313.00 −267.00 70 .00 144 .00 −6.00 38 .00 249 .00 433 .00 0 .00 765 .00
Sdev 11 , 095.61 14 , 532.35 12 , 322.54 10 , 314.53 9 , 654.53 11 , 383.17 17 , 667.79 6 , 950.99 719 .57 40 , 376.68
Skew −0.34 −0.33 −0.66 1 .69 −0.07 −0.17 −0.49 −0.05 −0.81 −0.61
Kurt 6 .50 8 .09 8 .13 51 .73 7 .88 10 .39 7 .95 5 .41 43 .93 6 .93
(b) Intraday
Hour 15:00-15:15 15:15-15:30 15:30-15:45 15:45-16:00 16:00-16:15 15:15-16:15
Mean − 138 .23 57 .20 218 .90 − 428 .75 311 .31 158 .65
t-stat − 1 .39 0 .61 1 .95 − 2 .11 2 .63 0 .53
Median 0 .00 84 .00 190 .00 0 .00 495 .00 868 .00
Sdev 5 , 863 .72 5 , 600 .23 6 , 698 .96 11 , 940 .43 6 , 830 .89 17 , 957 .57
Skew 0 .12 − 0 .16 − 0 .21 − 0 .36 0 .00 − 0 .30
Kurt 10 .64 7 .32 6 .58 6 .87 5 .32 6 .89
(c) EOD
Table A.7. Summary statistics: signed volume around the clock
Summary statistics for S&P 500 e-mini futures hourly signed volume defined as
SVt = #buy orders− #sell orders,
which states order imbalance measured in terms of number of contracts. Panel (a) displays overnight hours and panel (b) displays intraday
hours. Panel (c) displays SVt in quarterly intervals between 15:00 – 16:15 (ET) and in the final column reports summary statistics for
SV close
t which is signed volume measured between 15:15 – 16:15 (ET). Mean, medians and standard deviations are displayed in millions
of contracts. Sample period is January 2007 — December 2020.
20
=== PAGE 78 ===
VIX Low VIX Med VIX High VIX Low VIX Med VIX High
Panel A1: Positive SV Panel A2: Average VIX
SV Low 2,769.00 2,767.00 2,484.00 12.37 15.99 25.87
SV Med 8,970.00 9,196.00 8,840.00 12.40 15.79 24.08
SV High 17,597.00 20,315.50 22,295.00 13.24 18.33 28.27
Panel A3: OD Average Returns
VIX Low VIX Med VIX High High - Low p-value
SV Low 1.52 -3.43 -1.24 -2.76 0.50
SV Med -1.54 -0.68 6.96 8.50 0.01
SV High 0.33 -1.29 0.42 0.09 0.98
High-Low 1.19 -2.14 -1.66
p-value 0.50 0.41 0.77
Panel B1: Negative SV Panel B2: Average VIX
SV Low -2,747.50 -2,941.00 -3,031.00 13.84 18.41 27.14
SV Med -9,954.50 -10,052.00 -9,802.50 12.85 16.89 25.60
SV High -21,023.00 -25,804.00 -24,140.50 12.58 16.11 24.43
Panel B3: OD Average Returns
VIX Low VIX Med VIX High High - Low p-value
SV Low -0.01 1.20 13.27 13.28 0.00
SV Med 4.14 2.59 18.12 13.98 0.00
SV High 4.98 12.15 17.10 12.11 0.03
High-Low 4.99 10.95 3.83
p-value 0.03 0.00 0.54
Table A.8. Double sorts on signed volume and closing VIX
We split the sample into positive (panel a) and negative (panel b) closing signed volume.
Within each set we double-sort trading days into terciles of relative signed volume RSV and
the closing level of the V IX. Within each set we report average RSV s and V IX levels
(A1, A2, B1, B2). Double sorted overnight drift OD return averages are reported ( A3, B3)
along with high minus low differences and p-values testing the difference against zero. Sample
period is January 2007 – December 2020.
21
=== PAGE 79 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
SV 15:15-16:15 -0.07 -0.30 -0.66 0.05 0.15 0.12 -0.35 -0.21 -1.18 -0.21 0.35 0.30
(-0.22) (-1.34) (-3.11) (0.29) (0.87) (0.63) (-3.64) (-0.80) (-4.18) (-0.73) (1.48) (1.06)
µ -0.70 0.35 -0.15 0.10 -0.15 0.12 0.45 0.52 1.45 -0.09 0.06 0.36
(-1.28) (1.38) (-0.42) (0.66) (-0.72) (0.80) (2.50) (2.45) (6.14) (-0.27) (0.13) (0.98)
Adj. R2(%) 0.00 0.14 0.43 0.00 0.03 0.03 0.25 0.08 1.36 0.02 0.09 0.08
(a)
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
SV 15:15-16:15 -0.10 -0.32 -0.67 0.06 0.16 0.12 -0.32 -0.23 -1.16 -0.21 0.34 0.26
(-0.32) (-1.47) (-3.02) (0.36) (0.95) (0.63) (-3.17) (-0.88) (-4.23) (-0.72) (1.53) (0.93)
SV 14:15-15:15 0.41 0.35 0.16 -0.63 -0.18 -0.03 -0.43 -0.00 -0.46 -0.18 0.00 0.39
(0.67) (1.22) (0.31) (-1.81) (-0.54) (-0.15) (-1.44) (-0.01) (-1.17) (-0.81) (0.00) (1.23)
SV 13:15-14:15 0.45 0.04 0.02 0.61 -0.05 0.04 -0.29 0.81 -0.13 0.11 0.14 0.96
(0.86) (0.15) (0.06) (1.87) (-0.14) (0.15) (-0.80) (1.91) (-0.26) (0.27) (0.25) (1.71)
µ -0.68 0.36 -0.14 0.11 -0.15 0.12 0.44 0.55 1.44 -0.09 0.07 0.40
(-1.25) (1.38) (-0.41) (0.68) (-0.74) (0.83) (2.53) (2.54) (6.07) (-0.28) (0.14) (1.06)
Adj. R2(%) -0.04 0.12 0.35 0.23 -0.05 -0.07 0.35 0.33 1.35 -0.07 -0.01 0.28
(b)
Table A.9. Regression: overnight returns on closing signed volume
Panel (a) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on closing signed volume:
rH
t,n = µn + βSV
n SV close
t−1 + εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12.
Panel (b) estimates a multivariate extension to this regression that includes relative signed volume recorded in the final three hours of
the trading day before the maintenance break. Days where the time difference between London and New York is different from 5 hours
are excluded. Estimates are in basis points. t-statistics reported in parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered
within each month. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
22
=== PAGE 80 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
SV 1H Lag -8.63 -2.83 -0.60 5.13 5.49 7.28 4.54 7.51 4.92 -1.61 -1.95 1.29
(-1.55) (-1.50) (-0.33) (1.14) (1.23) (2.50) (0.86) (1.20) (0.79) (-0.47) (-1.39) (1.16)
µ -0.21 0.35 0.14 0.16 0.07 0.05 0.34 0.38 1.40 0.29 -0.03 0.03
(-0.51) (2.77) (1.12) (1.54) (0.58) (0.47) (2.08) (2.44) (6.78) (1.20) (-0.12) (0.14)
Adj.R2(%) 0.11 0.06 0.00 0.22 0.23 0.57 0.12 0.28 0.07 0.01 0.05 0.02
(a)
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
SV 1H Lag -8.68 -2.93 -1.43 5.65 4.50 6.29 6.04 7.11 0.51 -0.00 -1.80 1.60
(-1.51) (-1.59) (-0.88) (1.22) (1.19) (2.18) (1.17) (1.21) (0.11) (-0.00) (-1.15) (1.51)
SV 2H Lag -0.87 -2.51 -0.67 -4.79 4.81 2.19 -2.95 1.25 11.94 -14.67 0.60 -1.45
(-1.69) (-1.37) (-0.16) (-1.50) (1.22) (1.97) (-1.00) (0.42) (1.64) (-3.73) (0.18) (-0.86)
SV 3H Lag 0.24 -0.38 -4.83 0.25 -1.29 4.38 0.30 -3.63 0.68 -2.61 -4.70 -2.80
(0.67) (-1.82) (-1.52) (0.13) (-0.32) (2.43) (0.16) (-1.65) (0.11) (-0.53) (-1.27) (-1.20)
SV 4H Lag 0.34 -0.21 -0.79 2.75 3.82 1.70 -7.45 2.30 -2.52 -16.73 -0.91 5.00
(0.94) (-0.99) (-2.72) (1.15) (1.79) (0.83) (-3.16) (0.91) (-0.92) (-2.43) (-0.23) (1.03)
SV 5H Lag -0.20 0.12 -0.53 0.67 0.42 3.16 3.22 -2.69 -3.43 0.32 3.63 -6.70
(-0.44) (1.21) (-3.23) (2.80) (0.20) (1.75) (1.76) (-1.79) (-0.87) (0.05) (0.54) (-1.67)
SV 6H Lag -0.46 0.01 0.10 -0.13 0.58 2.09 0.07 -0.93 0.61 -1.06 -1.27 1.29
(-0.94) (0.06) (0.33) (-1.29) (2.04) (1.13) (0.03) (-0.36) (0.21) (-0.17) (-0.64) (0.44)
SV 7H Lag 0.25 0.12 -0.23 -0.44 0.17 -0.50 -0.12 -1.36 6.02 -0.91 0.76 0.85
(0.46) (0.49) (-0.86) (-2.77) (1.85) (-1.84) (-0.06) (-0.59) (1.55) (-0.18) (0.31) (0.31)
SV 8H Lag -0.38 0.15 0.04 0.24 -0.03 0.29 0.30 -0.71 2.42 6.77 0.85 0.95
(-1.06) (0.92) (0.13) (1.23) (-0.18) (1.67) (0.93) (-0.36) (0.79) (1.51) (0.31) (0.36)
SV 9H Lag 0.21 0.11 -0.27 0.04 -0.03 -0.07 -0.40 -1.11 -2.48 -3.47 -6.65 2.06
(0.34) (0.59) (-1.37) (0.13) (-0.09) (-0.32) (-3.88) (-4.87) (-1.18) (-0.90) (-1.78) (0.81)
SV 10H Lag 0.71 0.25 -0.29 -0.28 -0.06 -0.20 -0.31 -0.19 -1.58 -3.62 3.46 1.57
(1.04) (0.68) (-1.76) (-1.73) (-0.35) (-0.97) (-1.69) (-0.78) (-4.44) (-0.88) (1.01) (0.37)
SV 11H Lag -2.33 0.17 -0.18 -0.05 -0.05 0.24 -0.10 -0.11 -0.77 -0.34 -3.68 -1.23
(-1.50) (0.42) (-0.81) (-0.32) (-0.28) (1.03) (-0.40) (-0.57) (-2.92) (-0.76) (-1.11) (-0.79)
SV 12H Lag -2.63 -0.82 -0.37 0.06 -0.18 0.19 -0.02 0.35 -0.22 -0.59 -0.27 -0.26
(-1.20) (-1.10) (-0.68) (0.37) (-1.51) (0.89) (-0.10) (1.47) (-1.28) (-2.29) (-1.19) (-0.16)
µ -0.20 0.37 0.08 0.16 0.08 0.09 0.29 0.38 1.39 0.24 0.00 0.05
(-0.49) (2.84) (0.61) (1.46) (0.73) (0.79) (1.89) (2.47) (7.12) (1.03) (0.00) (0.23)
Adj.R2(%) 0.20 0.02 0.38 0.50 0.49 1.38 1.04 0.82 1.79 0.99 0.08 0.07
(b)
Table A.10. Falsification test
Panel (a) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on a one hour lag of signed volume. Panel
(b) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on twelve lags of hourly relative signed volume.
Days where the time difference between London and New York is different from 5 hours are excluded. Estimates are
in basis points. t-statistics reported in parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered within each
month. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
23
=== PAGE 81 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
SV 15:15-16:15 0.53 0.47 -0.73 -0.02 0.15 0.42 -0.49 0.31 -0.05 -1.04 -0.39 0.13
(0.39) (0.69) (-2.58) (-0.06) (0.58) (1.09) (-1.67) (0.82) (-0.11) (-1.58) (-0.70) (0.30)
NEG 1.78 -0.11 -0.32 1.18 0.44 1.01 -0.65 -0.60 2.18 -1.40 -0.94 -1.63
(0.86) (-0.16) (-0.32) (2.08) (0.63) (1.38) (-0.96) (-0.86) (2.01) (-1.12) (-0.95) (-1.31)
SV x NEG -0.45 -1.47 -0.00 0.57 0.17 -0.18 0.02 -1.20 -1.27 1.00 1.01 -0.30
(-0.31) (-1.77) (-0.00) (0.95) (0.39) (-0.48) (0.03) (-3.42) (-2.97) (1.17) (1.50) (-0.50)
µ -1.81 -0.52 0.00 -0.09 -0.25 -0.47 0.76 0.05 -0.36 1.18 1.13 0.93
(-1.09) (-0.72) (0.01) (-0.21) (-0.67) (-1.14) (1.60) (0.08) (-0.83) (1.52) (1.73) (1.18)
Adj.R2(%) 0.06 0.55 0.44 0.13 0.05 0.13 0.28 0.42 1.73 0.13 0.20 0.18
(a)
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
SV 15:15-16:15 -2.37 -1.03 0.83 -0.18 0.48 -0.51 0.47 -0.90 1.40 1.24 0.38 -1.46
(-1.52) (-1.05) (1.27) (-0.41) (0.87) (-0.80) (1.55) (-1.19) (3.04) (2.28) (0.37) (-2.82)
VIX 16:15 -0.03 0.02 0.08 -0.00 -0.04 0.02 0.07 0.03 0.07 -0.04 -0.09 -0.07
(-0.25) (0.36) (1.15) (-0.11) (-1.12) (0.42) (2.09) (0.96) (0.71) (-0.71) (-1.05) (-0.54)
SV x VIX 0.10 0.03 -0.06 0.01 -0.01 0.03 -0.04 0.03 -0.11 -0.06 -0.00 0.08
(1.32) (0.63) (-2.06) (0.48) (-0.50) (0.82) (-2.07) (0.72) (-4.11) (-2.43) (-0.02) (2.79)
µ -0.18 0.01 -1.70 0.16 0.61 -0.25 -1.00 0.01 0.02 0.80 1.78 1.65
(-0.10) (0.01) (-1.47) (0.29) (1.09) (-0.32) (-1.69) (0.02) (0.01) (0.65) (1.29) (0.76)
Adj.R2(%) 0.45 0.27 0.99 -0.08 0.04 0.18 0.75 0.24 2.91 0.24 0.15 0.70
(b)
Table A.11. Regression: overnight returns on closing signed volume and interactions
Panel (a) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on closing signed volume and an interaction term that takes on a value of ‘1’ if
SV close
t−1 < 0 and ‘0’ otherwise
rH
t,n = µn + βSV
n SV close
t−1 + βN EG
n 1 N EG,t+ βSV ×N EG
n SVt−1,close × 1 N EG,t+ εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12.
Panel (b) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight returns regressed on closing signed volume and an closing signed volume interacted with the level of
the VIX from the close of the preceding day
rH
t,n = µn + βSV
n SV close
t−1 + βV IX
n V IXclose
t−1 + βSV ×V IX
n SV close
t−1 × V IXclose
t−1 + ϵt,n, for n = 1, ...,12,
Days where the time difference between London and New York is different from 5 hours are excluded. Estimates are in basis points. t-statistics reported in
parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered within each month. Sample period is January 2007 – December 2020.
24
=== PAGE 82 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23
SV -0.67 -0.62 -0.96 0.42 0.40
(-2.00) (-3.54) (-2.81) (1.18) (1.33)
DST -1.48 0.80 -1.08 0.26 -0.04
(-1.26) (1.71) (-2.07) (1.01) (-0.08)
SV × DST 0.69 0.44 0.44 -0.53 -0.36
(1.38) (1.40) (1.12) (-1.46) (-1.09)
µ -0.05 -0.13 0.59 -0.23 -0.31
(-0.04) (-0.30) (1.34) (-1.68) (-1.29)
Adj. R2(%) 0.10 0.26 0.52 0.07 0.06
(a) Asia
24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05
SV -0.35 -0.34 -1.17 -0.15 0.24
(-3.98) (-1.18) (-4.42) (-0.57) (1.20)
DIF F 3.61 0.52 1.40 2.32 -1.57
(2.27) (1.43) (3.77) (1.28) (-1.02)
SV × DIF F -0.31 1.70 1.07 0.45 -1.86
(-0.40) (2.20) (0.86) (0.78) (-1.39)
µ 0.39 0.57 1.46 -0.12 0.01
(2.38) (3.09) (6.57) (-0.33) (0.03)
Adj. R2(%) 0.59 0.39 1.30 0.08 0.19
(b) Europe
Table A.12. Daylight saving tests
In panel (a) hourly overnight returns are regressed on closing relative signed volume and a dummy
variable for daylight savings time:
rH
t,n = µn + βSV
n SV close
t−1 + βDST
n 1 DST,t + βSV ×DST
n SVt−1,close × 1 DST,t + εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12,
where the dummy variable takes on a value of ‘0’ in winter time (DST not active) and ‘1’ in summer
time (DST active) and daylight savings is seen from a U.S. perspective. The Tokyo Stock Exchange
(TSE) opens at 19:00 when DST is not active and at 20:00 when DST is active. Estimates are
in basis points. In panel (b) hourly overnight returns are regressed on closing signed volume and
time-zone difference dummy:
rH
t,n = µn + βSV
n SV close
t−1 + βDIF F
n 1 DIF F,t+ βRSV ×DIF F
n SVt−1,close × 1 DIF F,t+ εt,n n = 1, . . . ,12,
where the dummy variable takes on a value of ‘0’ when the time-zone difference between London
and New York is 5 hours and a value of ‘1’ when the time-zone difference is 4 hours. t-statistics
reported in parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered within months. Sample
period is January 2007 – December 2020.
25
=== PAGE 83 ===
CTC CTO OTC OD OR
NEG -8.10 -1.85 -6.40 1.32 -2.14
t-stat (-1.44) (-0.64) (-1.43) (1.79) (-1.34)
POS-LOW -0.30 -0.09 -0.21 1.53 -3.70
t-stat (-0.07) (-0.04) (-0.07) (3.45) (-2.60)
POS-MEDIUM 1.52 -0.41 1.87 1.96 -0.64
t-stat (0.35) (-0.18) (0.50) (3.25) (-0.43)
POS-HIGH 4.89 4.58 0.32 1.17 -1.26
t-stat (1.19) (2.08) (0.09) (2.50) (-0.90)
No Announcements 4.57 2.11 2.34 1.38 -1.31
t-stat (1.86) (1.60) (1.17) (4.91) (-1.64)
Table A.13. Earnings announcements
We sort evening earnings announcements into negative, positive low/medium/high days, and non-
announcement days. Within each sort we compute average returns for the close-to-close ( CT C),
close-to-open (CT O), open-to-close (OT C), overnight drift (OD) and opening return (OP ) periods.
We report t-tests of the difference against the null of zero in parenthesis. Sample period is 1998.1 –
2020.12.
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
µ -0.68 0.29 0.22 0.03 -0.00 -0.06 0.50 0.41 1.52 0.60 -0.16 0.06 0.42 0.09 -0.07
(-1.57) (1.25) (0.79) (0.13) (-0.01) (-0.35) (2.38) (2.13) (5.98) (1.77) (-0.54) (0.22) (1.52) (0.30) (-0.16)
1U K 0.66 0.29 -0.42 0.19 -0.42 0.04 -0.05 -0.69 -0.37 -1.48 0.21 0.22 -0.88 -0.18 0.89
(1.02) (0.43) (-0.67) (0.39) (-0.85) (0.10) (-0.13) (-1.36) (-0.56) (-1.74) (0.24) (0.31) (-0.91) (-0.22) (0.85)
1EU -0.38 0.18 -0.86 -0.45 -0.76 0.52 -0.78 0.25 -0.04 -1.53 0.60 0.58 -0.44 0.22 -0.67
(-0.40) (0.29) (-1.37) (-0.89) (-1.11) (1.16) (-1.69) (0.55) (-0.06) (-1.60) (0.67) (0.70) (-0.57) (0.28) (-0.49)
1JP 0.12 0.66 1.22 0.66 -0.02 0.54 0.15 -0.46 0.11 0.42 0.22 0.52 1.57 -0.39 -0.99
(0.12) (1.07) (1.88) (0.99) (-0.03) (1.24) (0.31) (-0.88) (0.16) (0.45) (0.24) (0.68) (1.73) (-0.35) (-0.76)
1U S 1.15 -0.42 -0.61 -0.37 0.75 -0.13 0.18 0.00 -0.04 0.14 -0.16 -0.24 1.08 -1.01 3.22
(2.01) (-0.81) (-1.09) (-0.67) (1.63) (-0.34) (0.40) (2.27) (-0.07) (0.17) (-0.23) (-0.36) (1.38) (-1.35) (2.29)
(a) Macro
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
µ -0.08 0.19 -0.11 -0.13 -0.06 0.13 0.31 0.45 1.40 0.34 -0.41 0.14 0.42 0.02 0.38
(-0.23) (1.03) (-0.45) (-0.71) (-0.35) (0.90) (2.02) (2.81) (6.52) (1.10) (-1.49) (0.58) (1.70) (0.06) (0.91)
1BoE -0.81 5.52 4.19 1.58 -0.78 -0.48 0.61 -0.36 -0.49 0.50 2.21 -1.86 0.19 -2.68 -1.98
(-0.65) (3.18) (2.67) (1.38) (-1.11) (-0.65) (0.73) (-0.49) (-0.52) (0.30) (1.61) (-1.43) (0.17) (-1.29) (-0.81)
1ECB 0.80 -2.38 -0.60 -0.95 1.04 -0.66 -0.77 -1.22 0.21 0.45 1.63 0.29 1.78 2.68 -3.87
(0.89) (-1.92) (-0.32) (-0.96) (1.41) (-1.06) (-0.99) (-1.73) (0.23) (0.28) (1.14) (0.23) (1.63) (1.34) (-1.38)
1BoJ -0.18 0.07 0.75 1.80 -0.13 0.83 0.51 -0.06 0.15 -0.52 0.48 -0.41 -0.10 -1.19 1.84
(-0.11) (0.05) (0.85) (2.16) (-0.18) (1.13) (0.57) (-0.07) (0.15) (-0.39) (0.40) (-0.44) (-0.08) (-1.23) (0.94)
1F OM C-3.94 -0.29 0.35 -0.74 -0.31 -0.12 -0.43 1.27 1.39 -1.51 3.19 0.30 2.78 3.02 -4.28
(-1.57) (-0.30) (0.33) (-0.71) (-0.34) (-0.18) (-0.36) (0.99) (1.04) (-0.84) (2.13) (0.23) (1.50) (1.07) (-1.43)
(b) Central Banks
Table A.14. Announcements
We test the effect of announcements on the fixing return pattern in a bilateral regression framework
with dummy variables which take a ‘1’ on days with an announcement and ‘0’ otherwise. Specifically,
for each subinterval return we estimate the following regression
rH
t,n = µn + bn
1 1 U.K. + bn
2 1 EU + bn
3 1 JP + bn
4 1 U.S. + εn
t , n = 1, . . . ,15,
where for panel (a) 1 i is an employment, GDP or inflation announcement dummy for country i. For
panel (b) 1 i is a central bank announcement dummy for country i. t-statistics are computed from
HAC robust standard errors. Sample period is 1998.1 – 2020.12.
26
=== PAGE 84 ===
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
µ 2.39 0.68 0.18 4.37 2.73 0.88 -0.58 -0.27 -11.41 -6.27 2.77 -2.01
(1.16) (0.82) (0.09) (2.15) (1.24) (0.84) (-0.36) (-0.14) (-7.58) (-1.57) (0.97) (-0.96)
N. obs 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403 1403
(a) average VX return
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
VX SV 3:15-4:15 4.85 -0.83 1.50 -1.61 0.76 1.29 -2.14 1.54 -0.73 -2.71 2.52 0.51
(2.25) (-0.80) (0.48) (-1.23) (0.67) (1.33) (-1.17) (1.68) (-0.53) (-1.22) (1.66) (0.40)
ES SV 3:15-4:15 -0.66 0.05 -0.64 -0.62 -0.12 -0.37 -0.40 0.13 -1.36 0.74 0.17 0.30
(-0.96) (0.13) (-1.29) (-1.41) (-0.23) (-1.00) (-1.17) (0.48) (-3.18) (1.32) (0.35) (0.74)
µ -0.62 0.34 0.16 0.30 0.04 0.20 0.41 0.27 1.61 -0.09 -0.07 0.62
(-0.95) (0.96) (0.32) (0.68) (0.10) (0.68) (1.35) (0.82) (3.72) (-0.17) (-0.15) (1.48)
Adj. R2(%) 0.31 -0.11 0.10 0.06 -0.11 0.14 0.21 -0.03 0.67 0.19 0.01 -0.10
(b) ES return predictability
18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-22 23-24 24-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
VX SV 3:15-4:15 14.46 -4.80 -4.16 0.85 -11.18 -5.31 4.36 -13.13 1.69 32.74 -26.06 -11.13
(1.07) (-0.60) (-0.49) (0.10) (-1.64) (-0.75) (0.59) (-1.60) (0.26) (1.75) (-1.87) (-1.51)
ES SV 3:15-4:15 3.12 1.39 5.42 5.14 2.07 3.97 1.43 -0.88 4.83 1.09 -3.46 -0.44
(1.51) (0.81) (2.12) (2.39) (0.64) (1.61) (0.82) (-0.58) (2.27) (0.28) (-1.38) (-0.21)
µ 2.20 0.61 -0.03 4.12 2.70 0.71 -0.66 -0.16 -11.58 -6.62 3.09 -1.92
(0.94) (0.37) (-0.02) (1.71) (1.29) (0.45) (-0.44) (-0.09) (-5.68) (-2.02) (1.21) (-0.89)
Adj. R2(%) 0.16 -0.01 0.45 0.24 0.13 0.49 -0.04 0.19 0.33 0.40 0.49 0.00
(c) VX return predictability
Table A.15. Regression: overnight returns on closing signed volume: VX
Panel (a) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight VX returns regressed on a const which measured the unconditional mean during this hour. Panel (b)
displays regression estimates of hourly overnight ES returns regressed on ES and & VX closing signed volume leading up to the U.S. close period of the previous
trading day:
ES rH
t,n = µn + βESSV
n ES SV close
t−1 + βV XSV
n V X SVclose
t−1 + ϵt,n, for n = 1, ...,12,
Panel (c) displays regression estimates of hourly overnight VX returns regressed on ES and & VX closing signed volume leading up to the U.S. close period of
the previous trading day:
V X rH
t,n = µn + βV XSV
n V X SVclose
t−1 + βESSV
n ES SV close
t−1 + ϵt,n, for n = 1, ...,12,
Days where the time difference between London and New York is different from 5 hours are excluded. Estimates are in basis points. t-statistics reported in
parenthesis are computed from robust standard errors clustered within each month. Sample period is 2015.1 – 2020.12
27
=== PAGE 85 ===

=== PAGE 86 ===

=== PAGE 87 ===

=== PAGE 88 ===
 
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10Return (% p.a)
(a) 9:00 - 10:00
 
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10Return (% p.a) (b) 17:00 – 18:00
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1 - p
(c) 9:00 - 10:00
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1 - p (d) 17:00 – 18:00
Figure A.5. Year-by-year returns: 9:00 - 10:00 & 17:00 – 18:00
This figure plots yearly average log returns (top panels) and (1− p) the values from a t-test against the null hypothesis that these returns
are zero (bottom panels). Sub captions indicate the hour of the night. Sample period is January 1998 – December 2020.
31
=== PAGE 89 ===

=== PAGE 90 ===

=== PAGE 91 ===

=== PAGE 92 ===
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800Dollars Billions
Figure A.9. Equity VaR
As in Adrian and Shin (2014a), for firms which report VaRs at the 95% confidence level, we
scale the VaR to the 99% using the Gaussian assumption. This figure displays the time-series
of the resulting equity VaR. Source: Bloomberg. Sample period is 1999 Q1 – 2020 Q4.
35
=== PAGE 93 ===
(a) U.S. Macro Announcements
.
(b) FOMC Announcements
(c) Negative Earnings
 (d) Positive Earnings
(e) No Earnings
Figure A.10. Announcements per weekday
Figure displays the number of trading days, for each day of the week, where U.S. macro, bank
or earnings announcements are released. Sample period is 1998.1 – 2020.12.
36
=== PAGE 94 ===

=== PAGE 95 ===

=== PAGE 96 ===

=== PAGE 97 ===
98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Year
-0.8
-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Figure A.15. SUE score
Figure displays the time series of the SUE score for the S&P 500 index. The daily earnings surprise of the S&P 500 index is defined as
the daily sum of all individual firm surprises, ESi,t. For each firm i and on day t we define the earnings surprise as ESi,t =
Ai,t−Fi,t−
Pi,t−
,
where A is the actual earnings per share (EPS) as reported by the firm, F is the most recent median forecast of the EPS and P is the
stock price of the firm at the end of the quarter. The earnings data is obtained from I/B/E/S and Compustat. The sample period is
1998.1 – 2020.12.
40
=== PAGE 98 ===
