
=== PAGE 1 ===
Copyright © 2017 TWO SIGMA INVESTMENTS, LP. All rights reserved. This document is distributed for informational and 
educational purposes only. Please see the back of this report for important disclaimer and disclosure information.
Street 
View
www.twosigma.com 
NEW YORK HOUSTON 
LONDON HONG KONG
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY    The cost of rolling futures contracts, 
rather than the decline in commodity prices, has been the largest drag on 
commodity index performance over the past 10 years. Although difficult 
to implement, asset allocators’ best response may be to develop dynamic 
execution strategies to mitigate the roll return “tax.”
OCTOBER 2017
BY GERARDO MANZO & JEFFREY N. SARET
Inside:  
The Commodity Futures Roll Return ‘Tax’: 
Addressing a Recent Headwind
=== PAGE 2 ===
Copyright © 2017 TWO SIGMA INVESTMENTS, LP. All rights reserved.  This document is distributed for 
informational and educational purposes only.  Please see the back of this report for important disclaimer and 
disclosure information.
Street View October 2017 |  2
THE COMMODITY FUTURES ROLL RETURN ‘TAX’: ADDRESSING A RECENT HEADWIND
That commodity index returns have suffered both 
during 2017 and the past decade likely comes as no 
surprise to asset allocators.  What may surprise some 
is how commodity indices have suffered.  
Take the S&P GSCI Total Return Index as an example.  
The index has declined 2.38 percent year-to-date 
and 57.7 percent since 2007, but the spot prices 
of the underlying commodities have increased by 
0.88 percent year-to-date and only fallen by 6.53 
percent since 2007.¹ In other words, the largest drag 
on commodity index performance has not been 
the decline in commodity prices but rather the cost 
of rolling futures contracts in order to hold those 
positions. 
This negative drag exists at both the aggregate 
level (e.g., S&P GSCI Index) and for most individual 
commodity indices (e.g., agriculture and energy 
indices). Asset allocators trying to maintain a persistent 
exposure to commodities might want to bear in mind 
the magnitude of the headwinds of rolling futures 
contracts that has in the past persistently affected 
portfolio returns. 
DECOMPOSITION OF TOTAL INDEX RETURNS
Academic research like Erb and Harvey (2006) 
highlights the problem. The total return to a 
commodity index decomposes into three parts:² 
Total Return ≈ Spot Price Return + Futures Roll Yield + 
Collateral Return
or
Excess Return ≈ Spot Price Return + Futures Roll Yield 
where the collateral return equals the return to 
investing in US Treasury bills.  Figure 1 plots each of 
these terms since 1970 for the monthly S&P GSCI 
Index.
The figure highlights two important facts. First, 
spot returns fluctuated in a relatively tight band 
between 1970 and 2004, during which time the roll 
returns were positive. As a result, an allocator with a 
persistent exposure to commodities via the S&P GSCI 
Index during those three-plus decades would have 
benefitted from price increases in both the underlying 
commodities and from rolling futures contracts in 
backwardation. Second, the period since 2004 has 
been characterized by higher spot return volatility and 
negative average roll return (about -10 percent from 
2004 to 2017).
1 The indices are sampled monthly, using the end-of-month most 
available observation.
2  In general, this total return decomposition is true for any investment in 
futures, such as equity and bond futures. Moreover, the relation does not 
hold with equality because the S&P GSCI spot index   is not tradable and 
the collateral return is implicit in the clearing mechanism.
Figure 1 – S&P GSCI Excess Return, Spot Return, Collateral Return, and Roll Yield. 
Cumulative values. Source: Bloomberg and authors' computation. 
FIGURE 1 - S&P GSCI EXCESS RETURN, SPOT RETUR, COLLATERAL 
RETURN, AND ROLL YIELD
=== PAGE 3 ===
Copyright © 2017 TWO SIGMA INVESTMENTS, LP. All rights reserved.  This document is distributed for 
informational and educational purposes only.  Please see the back of this report for important disclaimer and 
disclosure information.
Street View October 2017 |  3
HOW CAN AN ALLOCATOR RESPOND TO 
NEGATIVE ROLL RETURNS?
An obvious question is why roll returns remain 
persistently negative. Unfortunately, some of the 
obvious answers seem incomplete. For example, Mou 
(2011) posits that GSCI’s published roll-rules allows 
arbitragers to front-run the index. That argument may 
be true at some level—publicly declaring when and how 
much to trade seems like a suboptimal approach—but a 
simple arbitrage strategy that persists for more than a 
decade strains even weak formulations of the efficient 
market hypothesis. 
Perhaps a more important question than why roll 
returns have been so negative for the past decade is 
what an asset allocator who wants persistent exposure 
to commodities can do about it. One option is to pay 
the roll return “tax” and accept that as the cost of 
holding commodity exposure.  Another option is to buy 
and store physical commodities. A third option is to 
develop execution strategies that look like a dynamic 
game—i.e., optimize a function that outputs a roll date 
and volume for each commodity, based on expected 
transaction costs. Transaction costs usually vary as a 
function of future spreads, volume, volatility, and other 
variables, making this dynamic game an uncertain one. 
This last option is not easy to implement, but it could 
lend itself to data analysis and systematic strategies.   
GLOSSARY ³
S&P GSCI Total Return Index: measures the returns 
accrued from investing in fully-collateralized nearby 
commodity futures.
S&P GSCI Excess Return Index: measures the returns 
accrued from investing in uncollateralized nearby 
commodity futures.
S&P GSCI Spot Return Index:  measures the level of 
nearby commodity prices.
Backwardation:  the condition in futures markets 
wherein the price of a commodities' futures contract 
is trading below the expected spot price at contract 
maturity. This also refers to a downward-sloping term 
structure of futures contracts.
Contango: the condition in futures markets wherein 
the price of a commodities' futures contract is trading 
above the expected spot price at contract maturity. 
This also refers to an upward-sloping term structure of 
futures contracts.
Roll return: represents the net benefit or cost of 
owning the underlying asset beyond moves in the spot 
price itself (CME Group, 2014).
REFERENCES 
Erb, <assistant> B., and Campbell R. Harvey. "The strategic and tactical value of commodity futures." Financial Analysts 
Journal62.2 (2006): 69-97.
Mou, Yiqun. "Limits to arbitrage and commodity index investment: front-running the Goldman roll." (2011).
CME Group. “Deconstructing Futures Returns: The Role of Roll Yield.” Campbell White Paper Series. (2014)
3 The definitions of the S&P GSCI Indices can be found here: http:/ /
www.goldmansachs.com/what-we-do/securities/products-and-business-
groups/products/gsci/components-weights-index-levels.html
=== PAGE 4 ===
Copyright © 2017 TWO SIGMA INVESTMENTS, LP. All rights reserved.  This document is distributed for 
informational and educational purposes only.  Please see the back of this report for important disclaimer and 
disclosure information.
Street View October 2017 |  4
Two Sigma views itself as a technology company that applies a rigorous, scientific method-based approach 
to investment management. Our technology is inspired by a diverse set of fields including artificial 
intelligence and distributed computing. Occasionally, we read articles in the popular press that describe 
applications of technology that we find interesting, thought-provoking, and relevant for people thinking 
about improving the investment management process. Below is a subset of the articles we read this month. 
Please do not view the inclusion of these articles as an endorsement by Two Sigma of their viewpoints or 
the companies discussed therein. Two Sigma welcomes discussions (and contributions) about these and 
other such technology-related articles.
INTERESTING TECHNOLOGY-RELATED ARTICLES
“How Blockchain Could Give Us a Smarter Energy Grid” by Mike Orcutt
https:/ /www.technologyreview.com/s/609077/how-blockchain-could-give-us-a-smarter-energy-grid/
Blockchain, the distributed, encrypted ledger system underpinning cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, has potential 
applications in almost any endeavor involving contracts and counterparties, since it can increase efficiency by 
eliminating intermediaries. Among its potential uses is to mitigate red tape and data-management problems 
plaguing the renewable energy sector. Currently, trading in clean energy depends on a byzantine system of 
certificates involving numerous different registries, brokers, and other intermediaries—a system that lacks 
transparency, is prone to accounting errors, and reduces incentives to invest in clean energy projects. Blockchain 
technology could ameliorate these issues and potentially even ease the way toward a decentralized system of 
clean electricity production from the generally centralized and inefficient power grid systems predominant today.
“China seeks dominance of global AI industry” by Louise Lucas 
https:/ /www.ft.com/content/856753d6-8d31-11e7-a352-e46f43c5825d?mhq5j=e7
While the U.S. artificial intelligence industry currently dwarfs that of China, the Chinese government is making 
development of its AI ecosystem a strategic priority. According to a July “State Council Notice on the Issuance 
of the Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan”  and subsequent reporting, China aims to grow 
its AI sector to $150 billion by 2030, through a combination of investments in state-owned enterprises (SOEs), 
universities, and promising private companies, as well as by encouraging the hiring of leading AI experts from 
overseas. Like other nations, China sees AI as having a potentially enormous economic and military impact, and 
sees an opportunity to create an advantage as other countries scale back their national research budgets.
=== PAGE 5 ===
Copyright © 2017 TWO SIGMA INVESTMENTS, LP. All rights reserved.  This document is distributed for 
informational and educational purposes only.  Please see the back of this report for important disclaimer and 
disclosure information.
Street View October 2017 |  5
IMPORTANT DISCLAIMER AND DISCLOSURE INFORMATION
This report is prepared and circulated for informational and educational purposes only and is not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to 
buy any securities or other instruments. The information contained herein is not intended to provide, and should not be relied upon for investment, 
accounting, legal or tax advice. This document does not purport to advise you personally concerning the nature, potential, value or suitability of 
any particular sector, geographic region, security, portfolio of securities, transaction, investment strategy or other matter. No consideration has 
been given to the specific investment needs or risk-tolerances of any recipient. The recipient is reminded that an investment in any security is 
subject to a number of risks including the risk of a total loss of capital, and that discussion herein does not contain a list or description of relevant 
risk factors. As always, past performance is no guarantee of future results. The recipient hereof should make an independent investigation of the 
information described herein, including consulting its own tax, legal, accounting and other advisors about the matters discussed herein. This report 
does not constitute any form of invitation or inducement by Two Sigma to engage in investment activity. 
The views expressed herein are not necessarily the views of Two Sigma Investments, LP or any of its affiliates (collectively, “Two Sigma”) but are 
derived from the Two Sigma Alpha Capture system (the “Alpha Capture System”), which gathers inputs from sell-side contributors (not analysts) 
to the Alpha Capture System who receive compensation for their participation, as further described in the section titled “Brief Explanation of 
the Data” (page 1 hereof) and the document titled “Overview of the Two Sigma Alpha Capture System”. Such views (i) may be historic or forward-
looking in nature, (ii) reflect significant assumptions and subjective judgments of the contributors to the Alpha Capture System as well as, in 
some instances, the authors of this report, and (iii) are subject to change without notice. Two Sigma may have market views or opinions that 
materially differ from those discussed, and may have a significant financial interest in (or against) one or more of such positions or theses. In some 
circumstances, this report may employ data derived from third-party sources. No representation is made as to the accuracy of such information 
and the use of such information in no way implies an endorsement of the source of such information or its validity. 
This report may include certain statements and projections regarding the anticipated future performance of various securities, sectors, geographic 
regions or of the Alpha Capture System generally. These forward-looking statements are inherently subject to significant business, economic and 
competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control. In addition, these forward-looking statements are subject to 
assumptions with respect to future business strategies and decisions that are subject to change. Factors which could cause actual results to differ 
materially from those anticipated include, but are not limited to: competitive and general business, economic, market and political conditions in the 
United States and abroad from those expected; changes in the legal, regulatory and legislative environments in the markets in which Two Sigma 
operates; and the ability of management to effectively implement certain strategies. Words like “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “promise,” “plan,” 
and other expressions or words of similar meanings, as well as future or conditional verbs such as “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” or “may” are 
generally intended to identify forward-looking statements. 
Two Sigma makes no representations, express or implied, regarding the accuracy or completeness of this information, and the recipient accepts all 
risks in relying on this report for any purpose whatsoever. This report is being furnished to the recipient on a confidential basis and is not intended 
for public use or distribution. By accepting this report, the recipient agrees to keep confidential the existence of this report and the information 
contained herein. The recipient should not disclose, reproduce, distribute or otherwise make available the existence of and/or all or any portion of 
the information contained herein to any other person (other than its employees, officers and advisors on a need-to-know basis, whom the recipient 
will cause to keep the information confidential) without Two Sigma’s prior written consent. This report shall remain the property of Two Sigma and 
Two Sigma reserves the right to require the return of this report at any time. 
Some of the images, logos or other material used herein may be protected by copyright and/or trademark. If so, such copyrights and/or 
trademarks are most likely owned by the entity that created the material and are used purely for identification and comment as fair use under 
international copyright and/or trademark laws. Use of such image, copyright or trademark does not imply any association with such organization (or 
endorsement of such organization) by Two Sigma, nor vice versa.
© 2017 Two Sigma Investments, LP | ALL RIGHTS RESERVED | “Two Sigma” and “ 2σ” are trademarks of Two Sigma Investments, LP.