
=== PAGE 1 ===
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACROECONOMIC ANNOUNCEMENT PREMIUM
Hengjie Ai
Ravi Bansal
Hongye Guo
Working Paper 31923
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31923
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2023, Revised December 2023
We thank Leyla Han and three anonymous reviewers for the helpful comments and valuable 
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official 
NBER publications.
© 2023 by Hengjie Ai, Ravi Bansal, and Hongye Guo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, 
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full 
credit, including 
© notice, is given to the source.
=== PAGE 2 ===
Macroeconomic Announcement Premium 
Hengjie Ai, Ravi Bansal, and Hongye Guo 
NBER Working Paper No. 31923 
November 2023, Revised December 2023
JEL No. A0,E0,E37,E40
ABSTRACT
The paper reviews the evidence on the macroeconomic announcement premium and its 
implications on equilibrium asset pricing models. Empirically, a large fraction of the equity 
market risk premium  is realized on a small number of trading days with significant 
macroeconomic announcements. We review the literature that demonstrates that the existence of 
the macroeconomic announcement premium  implies that investors’ preferences must satisfy 
generalized risk sensitivity. We show how this conclusion generalizes to environments with 
heterogeneous investors and demonstrate how incorporating generalized  risk sensitivity affects 
economic analysis in dynamic setups with uncertainty.
Hengjie Ai
Department of Finance 
Wisconsin School of Business 
University of Wisconsin 
Madison, WI 53705
hengjie.ai@wisc.edu
Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
 
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive Durham, 
NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu
Hongye Guo
University of Hong Kong
724 K. K. Leung Building 
University of Hong Kong 
<email>
=== PAGE 3 ===
1 Introduction
The macroeconomic announcement premium refers to the fact that a large fraction of the equity
market risk premium is realized on a small number of trading days with significant macroeconomic
announcements. During the period 1961-2023, roughly 44 days per year with macroeconomic
announcements account for more than 71% of the aggregate equity market risk compensation.
This survey reviews the evidence on the macroeconomic announcement premium and discusses
its implications for general equilibrium asset pricing models. It has four parts. The first part of
the survey reviews the stylized facts about the macroeconomic announcement premium. It focuses
on three aspects of the macroeconomic announcement premium: the unconditional macroeconomic
announcement premium, the pre-FOMC announcement drift, and the predictability of the macroe-
conomic announcement premium in time series and in the cross section.
The second part of the survey reviews the study of the macroeconomic announcement pre-
mium in representative-agent models. The presence of the macroeconomic announcement pre-
mium demonstrates that most of the equity market risk compensation is realized when news about
macroeconomic risk is revealed, not when the actual risk is materialized. The necessary and suffi-
cient condition for the announcement premium, a condition named generalized risk sensitivity by
Ai and Bansal (2018), is demonstrated with a simple example.
The third part of the survey discusses the implications of the macroeconomic announcement
premium and generalized risk sensitivity on equilibrium asset pricing models. It covers both
representative-agent based asset pricing models as well as heterogeneous-agent models. The basic
insights from Ai and Bansal (2018) continue to hold: the macroeconomic announcement premium
reflects the fact that risk compensation is realized when information is revealed. It requires a
pricing kernel with a forward-looking component.
The last part of the survey discusses the connection between the macroeconomic announcement
premium and the study of the impact of monetary policy on asset markets and the real economy.
The overall assessment of the current status of research on macroeconomic announcement premiums
is provided in the conclusion.
2 Evidence from data
The macroeconomic announcement premium Savor and Wilson (2013) are the first to docu-
ment the existence of the macroeconomic announcement premium. They show that average returns
and Sharpe ratios are significantly higher on macroeconomic announcement days. Table 1 reports
the average excess market returns on macroeconomic announcement days and non-announcement
days from 1961 to 2023. In this period, on average, 44 trading days per year have significant
macroeconomic announcements. At the daily level, the average stock market excess return is 10.68
basis points (bps) on announcement days and 0 .93 bps on days without major macroeconomic
announcements. As a result, the cumulative excess stock market return on the 44 announcement
days averages 4.65% per year, accounting for about 71% of the annual equity premium (6.59%).
2
=== PAGE 4 ===
This evidence is broadly consistent with that in Savor and Wilson (2013), Ai and Bansal (2018),
and Ernst, Gilbert, and Hrdlicka (2019). Following Ai and Bansal (2018), Table 1 examines the
top 5 (by Bloomberg investor attention) pre-scheduled macroeconomic announcements released at
a monthly frequency or lower. We combine the PPI and CPI announcements into one “inflation”
announcement by using the earlier one each month, as they reveal information of a similar nature.
This additional step becomes necessary because in recent years the CPI announcement starts to
regularly occur before the PPI announcement, whereas historically the PPI announcements were
mostly earlier. During our sample period, the premium on macroeconomic announcement days is
large and significant.
Table 1: Macroeconomic Announcement Premium
# of days p.a. Daily prem. Prem. p.a. t-stat
Market 252 2.62 bps 6.59% 3.29
Non-Ann 208 0.93 bps 1.94% 1.08
Ann 44 10.68 bps 4.65% 5.36
FOMC 10 17 .61 bps 1.74% 4.71
Non-FOMC 34 8.65 bps 2.91% 3.71
This table documents the average excess return of the U.S. stock market during the 1961-2023 period. The column
“# days p.a.” is the average number of trading days per annum. The second column is the daily market equity
premium on all days, announcement days, and days without announcements. The column labeled “Prem. p.a.” is
the cumulative excess market returns within a year, computed by multiplying the daily premium by the number of
event days and converting it into percentage points. The announcements are the FOMC, Non-farm payroll, GDP
(first and last), ISM manufacturing PMI, and the earlier of the CPI and PPI announcements.
The robustness of the macroeconomic announcement premium over the last six decades indicate
that it is likely a compensation for risk. Liu and Shaliastovich (2021) argue that state of the
union addresses and elections are analogous pre-scheduled events that resolve government policy
uncertainty for the economy. Their sample dates back to the 1930s, and they also find high
average stock market returns over these events, broadening the scope of evidence related to the
announcement premium. Some authors—for example, Kurov, Wolfe, and Gilbert (2021)—find that
the premium for the FOMC announcement was low between January 2016 and December 2019
and attribute the decline to reduced uncertainty over this period. Since then, the announcement
premium has been above historical average. Specifically, from January 2020 to August 2023, the
average announcement premium was 16.33 basis points per announcement, higher than the full
sample average of 10.68 basis points.
Macroeconomic announcements—in particular, the FOMC announcement—affect other asset
markets and other countries as well. Savor and Wilson (2013) and Lucca and Moench (2015) show
that short-term Treasury bills do not earn significantly higher average returns on announcement
days, and that the premium for longer-term Treasury notes and bonds appears to increase with ma-
turities but is lower in magnitude than that of equities. Mueller, Tahbaz-Salehi, and Vedolin (2017)
show that major foreign currencies have a clear announcement premium on FOMC announcement
3
=== PAGE 5 ===
days. They argue that the premium reflects compensation for monetary policy uncertainty through
constrained financial intermediaries. Savor and Wilson (2014) show that currency carry trade
portfolios have higher expected returns on macroeconomic announcement days. Brusa, Savor, and
Wilson (2020) show that during FOMC announcement days, stock markets in other countries also
exhibit high returns. In contrast, monetary policy announcements in other countries do not exhibit
the same influence on global stock market returns as the FOMC announcements. Guo, Jia, and
Sun (2022) document a significant stock market risk premium during the period of Chinese central
announcement. Overall, the macroeconomic announcement premium is an empirical regularity with
a broad scope and a high consistency.
Evidence from the cross section of equity returns Savor and Wilson (2014) study the ex-
pected return-beta relation across various portfolios on announcement days and non-announcement
days. They demonstrate that the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) holds very well on macroe-
conomic announcement days. That is, there is a robust linear relation between assets’ average
returns on macroeconomic announcement days and their betas. Figure 1 reproduces the Savor and
Wilson (2014) result. We sort the cross sections of stocks into deciles using their ex-ante market
betas, which are estimated on a rolling one-year window with daily returns. The horizontal axis is
the realized beta for each portfolio, and the vertical axis is the average return on announcement
days (circles) and non-announcement days (squares), respectively. The solid line is the security
market line estimated using announcement day observations, and the dashed line is the fitted se-
curity market line using non-announcement day returns. As demonstrated in Savor and Wilson
(2014), the security market line on announcement days has a significantly positive slope with an
estimated slope coefficient of 6.81 basis points. Because the slope of the security market line is
the market risk premium under CAPM, the expected return-beta relationship provides additional
evidence for the macroeconomic announcement premium.
Figure 1: CAPM on announcement and non-announcement days
slope: -1.27
slope: 6.81
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6
Portfolio return (basis points)
Portfolio beta
Non-ann days Ann days
This figure shows the security market lines on 10 beta-sorted stock portfolios on announcement and non-announcement
days. The x-axis is the ex-post beta, and the y-axis is the excess return of the portfolio. Data are from 1961 to 2023.
4
=== PAGE 6 ===
The literature has since built on Savor and Wilson (2014) and expanded it both theoretically and
empirically. Wachter and Zhu (2022) put forth a model that accounts for both the announcement
premium and the steep security market line on the announcement day. Andrei, Cujean, and Wilson
(2023) develop a noisy rational expectations model and demonstrate that the security market line
is steep on days when public information reduces disagreement among investors, but flat on non-
announcement days, thereby providing an explanation for the robustness of the CAPM relationship
on announcement days. Ozdagli and Velikov (2020) demonstrate that monetary policy shock is a
price risk factor in the cross section of equity returns. Ai, Han, Pan, and Xu (2022) expand the
scope of evidence by showing that stocks that are more sensitive to monetary policy announcement
surprises earn a higher premium on FOMC announcement days.
The pre-macroeconomic announcement drift Many of the macroeconomic announcement
premiums exhibit a drift, meaning that a significant portion of the premium is realized hours
before the announcement. The most famous example of this is the pre-FOMC announcement drift
documented by Lucca and Moench (2015). Figure 2 extends the sample period and reproduces
Lucca and Moench (2015)’s findings.
The top panel shows the average three-day cumulative return of the S&P 500 E-mini futures
around FOMC announcement days. The bottom panel is the realized volatility during the same
time period. The shaded area, 14:00-14:30 p.m., depicts the timing of most pre-scheduled FOMC
meetings. The solid lines represent the average cumulative returns (top panel) and realized volatility
(bottom panel) on FOMC announcement days, and the dashed lines represent those on the non-
FOMC announcement days. Consistent with Lucca and Moench (2015), we find that the 24-
hour return before the pre-scheduled FOMC announcement during the period of September 1997
to August 2022 is 37.5 basis points on average. The realized volatility during the pre-FOMC
announcement period is significantly lower (18.69 daily bps) than the realized volatility during the
same hours on non-announcement days.
Several other macroeconomic announcements, including the GDP, Unemployment/Non-farm
Payroll, and ISM manufacturing PMI index announcements, also exhibit drifts during hours leading
up to the announcements. Using S&P 500 E-mini futures, Hu, Pan, Wang, and Zhu (2022) show
that other macroeconomic announcements also exhibit a large risk premium in the hours before
the announcement. In addition, we show that the realized volatility for other macroeconomic
announcements during the same hours is also slightly lower compared to that on non-announcement
days. In Table 2, the second column reproduces the average returns of Hu, Pan, Wang, and Zhu
(2022), and the third column displays the realized volatility during the same hours for GDP, Non-
farm Payroll, ISM announcements, and non-announcement days. The pre-announcement return and
volatility are defined as the average cumulative returns and volatility from 4:30 p.m. of the previous
trading day to five minutes ahead of the announcement. Overall, the average return during the pre-
announcement trading hours is often significantly higher compared to that on a non-announcement
day. Ai, Bansal, and Han (2022) provide an equilibrium model for the high average return and
5
=== PAGE 7 ===
Figure 2: The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift
This
figure plots the average cumulative return and 30-minute realized volatility around FOMC announcements.
The top panel depicts the average three-day cumulative return (in percentages) around FOMC and non-FOMC
announcement days. The solid line displays the average cumulative return during regular trading hours from 9:30
a.m. on one trading day before the FOMC announcements to 16:00 p.m. on days afterward. The dashed line is
the average cumulative return on all three consecutive trading days that do not include any FOMC announcement.
The shaded area, 14:00-14:30 p.m. is the half-hour window containing most of the FOMC releases. The bottom
panel plots the intraday average market realized volatility during three trading days around FOMC and non-FOMC
announcement days. The dotted line is the realized volatility for FOMC announcement days, and the dashed line is
that for non-FOMC announcement days. Realized volatility (bps) is the average rolling sum of squared 1-minute log
returns on the S&P 500 E-mini futures over the past 30 minutes. The dashed line is the same calculation on all three
consecutive trading days that do not include any FOMC announcement. The realized volatility is calculated for each
minute from 10:00 to 16:00 p.m.. The shaded area, 14:00-14:30 p.m., is the half-hour window containing most of the
FOMC releases. The sample period is from 1997 to 2022.
low volatility during the pre-announcement period based on information acquisition activities of
heterogeneously informed investors.
The realization of a high average return before scheduled announcements has motivated re-
searchers to investigate the possibility of information leakage. The theoretical model of Ai and
Bansal (2018) provides conditions under which the resolution of uncertainty is associated with
realizations of a risk premium. Under these conditions, leakage of information will result in the
6
=== PAGE 8 ===
Table 2: Pre-announcement drift
Average Return Realized Volatility
GDP 8.42 63.63
(2.07)
Non-farm Payroll 8.48 60.20
(2.95)
ISM 14.43 78.24
(3.26)
Non-announcement 0.97 68.46
(1.02)
This table documents the average return and realized volatility during pre-announcement hours for the GDP,
Unemployment/Non-farm Payroll, and ISM manufacturing reports. Both the GDP and unemployment reports are
published at 8:30 a.m., whereas the ISM report is announced at 10:00 a.m. Average return is calculated as the
cumulative return from 4:00 p.m. of the previous trading day to five minutes ahead of the respective announcements.
Realized volatility (bps) is the average sum of squared one-minute log returns on the S&P 500 E-mini futures from
the same time period. The “Non-announcement” row contains all other days except FOMC and the above macro
announcements, and reflects the window of 4 p.m. of the previous day to 9:30 a.m. of the same day. The sample
period is from 1997 to 2022.
realization of risk compensation during the same period. Ai and Bansal (2018) also present a
continuous-time model where information arrival happens hours before the pre-scheduled announce-
ment probabilistically and demonstrate that their model can generate an pre-announcement drift.
Cieslak, Morse, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2019) document a biweekly cycle in average stock market
returns around FOMC announcements. Starting in week 0 from the day before the announcement
day, they show that the stock market returns in week 0, 2, 4, and 6 are especially large on av-
erage. They interpret this evidence as the result of systematic informal communication from the
Fed officials. Morse and Vissing-Jorgensen (2020) further investigate these instances of informal
communication using the calendars of the Fed governors. Bernile, Hu, and Tang (2016) examine
the 30-minute periods immediately preceding the FOMC announcements over which the announce-
ments’ content is pre-released to selected media under strict embargo. They argue that the content
is leaked despite the embargo, demonstrating the difficulty in locking up information once it reaches
the media in some form. Abdi and Wu (2018) argue that informed trading occurs in the corporate
bond market before the FOMC announcements.
Some authors have presented suggestive evidence against the leakage of information. Lucca
and Moench (2015) show that returns on the S&P 500 index during the pre-FOMC announcement
period have little predictive power for its returns during the hours after the announcement. Cocoma
(2018) uses post-announcement returns, defined as the S&P 500 return from after the FOMC
announcement (typically 2:30 p.m.) to the close of the trading day to separate the sample into “good
news periods” and “bad news periods.” “Good news” is defined as positive post-announcement day
7
=== PAGE 9 ===
returns, and “bad news” is defined as negative post-announcement day returns. She shows that
pre-FOMC announcement returns on good news days are not systematically higher than those on
bad news days and are in fact slightly lower. In addition, substantial leakage of the content of the
announcement, however, should trigger heightened realized volatility. Contrary to this implication,
as shown in Figure 2 and Table 2, the realized volatility during the pre-announcement period is
slightly lower than that on non-announcement days.
3 Theoretical foundation
The fact that most of the equity market risk premium is realized on a few macroeconomic an-
nouncement days presents a challenge to standard asset pricing models. Take the classic Breeden
(1979) model, for example. Risk evolves slowly as Brownian motions, and as a result, the risk
premium investors receive on the market portfolio will be proportional to the holding period of the
asset. The data on the macroeconomic announcement premium paints a very different picture: the
risk premium on most trading days is very small and even negligible. Most of the risk premium is
realized on a small number of trading days where uncertainty about the macroeconomy is resolved.
Ai and Bansal (2018) provide a theoretical study on conditions under which the macroeconomic
announcement premium arises in general equilibrium. Dynamic preferences in general equilibrium
models can in general be written recursively as
Vt = u (Ct) + βI [Vt+1] , (1)
where Vt represents life-time utility at time t, Ct is consumption at time t, u (·) is a utility function
that converts current-period consumption into utility, and the certainty equivalent functional I [·]
converts continuation utility in the next period, Vt+1, which is a random variable, into its certainty
equivalent. Ai and Bansal (2018) demonstrate that under regularity conditions, the macroeco-
nomic announcement premium is positive if and only if the representative consumer’s preference
(1) satisfies a condition called generalized risk sensitivity (GRS).
To understand generalized risk sensitivity, consider the following representative-agent economy
with three periods, as shown in Figure 3. In the top panel, the only uncertainty is in period 1, where
the consumption of the representative agent, C1, is a random variable. Assume that C1 can take
on N possible values, {C1 (s)}N
s=1 with C1 (1) = CL being the lowest realization and C1 (N ) = CH
being the highest realization, and C1 (1) ≤ C1 (2) ≤ · · ·C1 (N ). Denote the probability of each
state to be π (s) = 1
N for all s.1 The figure depicts two values of the realizations of C1: CH
and CL. In period 0, consumption is a constant, C0, but the representative agent receives an
announcement that carries information about future consumption. 2 For simplicity, we assume that
1For simplicity, in this example, we assume equal probability for all states. Ai and Bansal (2018) assume a
non-atomic probability space and do not need this assumption.
2Here, C0 is aggregate consumption. As in Lucas (1978), although aggregate consumption is fixed, individual
investors are free to adjust their consumption and investment. The optimality conditions with respect to consumption
and investment choices pin down the asset prices in the economy.
8
=== PAGE 10 ===
Figure 3: A three-period economy with an announcement
Period -1 Period 0 Period 1 
  Resolution of uncertainty Realization of outcome 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Period -1 Period 0 Period 1 
 Resolution of uncertainty Realization of outcome 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
𝐶−1 
𝐶0 
 
𝐶𝐻 
𝐶𝐿  
−𝟏 
 
1𝑯 
 
𝟎𝑳 
 
𝟎𝑯 
1𝑳 
 
𝑃−1 
𝑃0(𝐶𝐻) 𝑋(𝐶𝐻) 
𝑋(𝐶𝐿) 
−𝟏 
 
1𝑯 
 
𝟎𝑳 
 
𝟎𝑯 
1𝑳 
 
𝑃0(𝐶𝐿) 
the announcement fully resolves uncertainty and reveals the true value of C1. Period −1 is the
pre-announcement period, where the agent does not know the upcoming announcement.
In the bottom panel of the figure, we plot the prices of an asset that has a one-time payoff
in period 1, denoted X (C1). Here, we assume that the asset’s payoff is a function of aggregate
consumption. As a result, the announcement that resolves uncertainty about C1 also reveals the
payoff, X (C1). P−1 is the pre-announcement price of the asset, and P0 is the post-announcement
price. The asset is said to earn a macroeconomic announcement premium if the investment strategy
of buying the asset before the announcement and selling right afterwards provides a higher expected
return than the risk-free asset. That is,
E [P0]
P−1
> Rf,0,
where Rf,0 denotes the risk-free rate between period −1 and period 0.
The lifetime utility of the representative agent is written as
u (C−1) + I [u (C0) + βu (C1)] . (2)
Here, the utility is constructed using recursion (1) in two steps. First, after the announcement in
period 0, all uncertainty about the future is resolved, and there is no need for the certainty equivalent
aggregator. Period-0 utility is hence represented as V0 (s) = u (C0) +βu (C1 (s)). Second, in period
−1, we apply the recursion to compute the period- −1 utility as u (C−1) + I [V0 (s)], which is the
same as (2). We do not impose a discount factor β in this step because the announcement window
9
=== PAGE 11 ===
(i.e., period 0) is very short and not meaningfully far away from period −1.3
In this economy, the stochastic discount factor can be computed as the intertemporal rate of
substitution of the representative agent. We call the stochastic discount factor that computes the
period-0 payoff in terms of the period- −1 consumption numeraire the announcement stochastic
discount factor, or ASDF . Using the chain rule,
ASDF (s) = 1
π (s)
u′ (C0)
u′ (C−1) × ∂I
∂Vs
. (3)
Because an equal probability is assumed for all states, the only term in (3) that depends on s is ∂I
∂Vs .
The term u′ (C0) does not depend on s because we assume that consumption in period 0 does not
depend on the announcement, as shown in Figure 3. Intuitively, during a short announcement win-
dow (period 0), it is virtually impossible for aggregate consumption to respond to macroeconomic
news. Suppose we focus on payoffs that are pro-cyclical; that is, they are increasing in period-1
consumption, C1 (s), or equivalently, increasing in s. The risk premium on such a payoff is positive
if the vector of partial derivatives,
n
∂I
∂Vs
oN
s=1
, is a decreasing function of s.4 In fact, the converse of
this observation is also true. That is, if the announcement risk premium for any pro-cyclical payoff
is positive, then
n
∂I
∂Vs
oN
s=1
must be a decreasing function of s. This is the basic intuition of the
Theorem of Generalized Risk Sensitivity in Ai and Bansal (2018). To formally state the theorem,
we first provide a definition of generalized risk sensitivity.
Definition 1. (Generalized Risk Sensitivity)
A dynamic preference represented by the recursion (1) where bothu and I are strictly increasing
is said to satisfy (strict) generalized risk sensitivity if I is (strictly) increasing in second-order
stochastic dominance. That is, for any two random variables, X and Y , if X (strictly) second-
order stochastic dominates Y , then I [X] ≥ I[Y ] (I [X] > I [Y ]).
Theorem 1 is a version of the Theorem of Generalized Risk Sensitivity in Ai and Bansal (2018).
Theorem 1. (Theorem of Generalized Risk Sensitivity)
Assuming that both the utility function u and the certainty equivalent functional I are contin-
uously differentiable, the following statements are equivalent:
1. The dynamic preference specified in (1) satisfies (strict) generalized risk sensitivity.
2. The vector of partial derivatives,
n
∂I
∂Vs
oN
s=1
is a non-increasing (strictly decreasing) function
of s.
3. For any vector of payoffs, {P0 (s)}N
s=1 such that P0 (s) is increasing in s, the announcement
premium for {P0 (s)}N
s=1 is non-negative (strictly positive).
3However, imposing discounting in this step will not affect the conclusion of Theorem 1 below.
4Recall that the risk premium of any asset depends on the covariance of its return with the stochastic discount
factor, which ASDF in our setup.
10
=== PAGE 12 ===
Intuitively, risk premium is informative about the properties of the stochastic discount factor.
Because during the short period of a macroeconomic announcement, the movement in aggregate
consumption is negligible, the announcement stochastic discount factor, (3), depends only on the
properties of the vector of partial derivatives,
n
∂I
∂Vs
oN
s=1
. The Theorem of Generalized Risk Sensi-
tivity implies that the sign of the announcement premium contains enough information that allows
us to precisely pin down the property of I, which is generalized risk sensitivity.
4 Implications of generalized risk sensitivity
Preferences in economic modeling Most economic modeling starts with assumptions on pref-
erences. To make sense of many important economic questions, such as intertemporal consumption
smoothing, the trade-off between inequality and efficiency, equity market risk compensation, and so
on, one needs non-linear utility functions, or more precisely, one needs to assume certain concavity
properties of preferences. The literature has entertained two ways of incorporating non-linearity
into preferences. In expected utility models, the certainty equivalent functional, I, is the expecta-
tion operator and therefore linear. The non-linearity in preferences comes from the concavity of the
Bernoulli utility function u (·). In the context of asset pricing models, the habit formation model
is an example of non-linearity in u.
The second way to introduce non-linearity is through the certainty equivalent functional I.
Many non-expected utility models, such as the recursive utility model (Kreps and Porteus (1978),
Epstein and Zin (1989)), the maxmin expected utility model (Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989)), the
robust control model (Hansen and Sargent (2007)), and the smooth ambiguity model (Klibanoff,
Marinacci, and Mukerji (2005)), take this approach. 5 Theorem 1 implies that the curvature in the
certainty equivalent functional I requires risk compensation upon macroeconomic announcements,
where the curvature in the utility function u does not require any announcement premium. The
fact that, quantitatively, most of the equity premium is announcement premium implies that the
curvature in I must be quantitatively large, and the curvature in u is likely to be relatively small.
Interpreted this way, the empirical fact of the announcement premium provides asset price based
support for these non-expected utility models.
Connection to leading asset pricing models In the representative agent setup, there are
several leading asset pricing models, including the habit model (Constantinides (1990), Abel (1990),
Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001b)), the long-run risk model
(Bansal and Yaron (2004), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008)), the rare disaster model (Rietz (1988),
Barro (2006), Gabaix (2012), Wachter (2013)), and the robust control model of Hansen and Sargent
5Other examples include the multiplier preference of Strzalecki (2011); the variational ambiguity-averse preference
of Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006a,b); the smooth ambiguity model of Klibanoff, Marinacci, and Mukerji
(2005, 2009); the disappointment aversion preference of Gul (1991); and the recursive smooth ambiguity preference of
Hayashi and Miao (2011). See Ai and Bansal (2018) for a list of non-expected utility models that satisfy generalized
risk sensitivity. See Puhl, Savor, and Wilson (2022) for an application of the smooth ambiguity model to study the
macroeconomic announcement premium.
11
=== PAGE 13 ===
(2005, 2007). The asset pricing implications of these models are often hard to distinguish. For
example, see Beeler and Campbell (2011) and Bansal and Yaron (2004). The empirical regularity
of the macroeconomic announcement premium provides a test that can qualitatively distinguish
these asset pricing models.
The external habit model is an additively separable expected utility model and, as a result,
generates a zero announcement premium. As shown by Ai and Bansal (2018), the internal habit
model of Constantinides (1990) and Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001a) produces a negative
announcement premium. The consumption substitutability model of Dunn and Singleton (1986)
and Heaton (1993) is consistent with a positive announcement premium, although this feature of
the utility function smooths the marginal utility process and does not account for the asset market
data, as highlighted in Gallant, Hansen, and Tauchen (1990).
The long-run risk model is based on the recursive utility of Kreps and Porteus (1978) and
Epstein and Zin (1989). Ai and Bansal (2018) show that, within the class of recursive utility
with constant risk aversion and constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution, the preference for
early resolution of uncertainty (PER) is equivalent to GRS. As a result, the long-run risk model
is consistent with a positive announcement premium. The robust control model of Hansen and
Sargent (2007) also satisfies generalized risk sensitivity and generates a positive announcement
premium.
The rare disaster models of Rietz (1988), Barro (2006), and Gabaix (2012) are based on the
constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) expected utility and imply a zero announcement premium.
The models of Wachter (2013), Tsai and Wachter (2016), and Tsai and Wachter (2018) incorporate
recursive utility and are consistent with an announcement premium. Wachter and Zhu (2022)
explicitly present a model with GRS preferences where macroeconomic announcements reveal the
probability of disasters and generate an announcement premium in equilibrium.
In the context of recursive utility with constant elasticity—that is, constant risk aversion and
constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES)—GRS is equivalent to the preference for
early resolution of uncertainty (PER). This is typically the assumption made in the long-run risk
literature and in most recursive utility based asset pricing models. However, outside this special
class of recursive utility, the equivalence between PER and GRS breaks down. Ai and Bansal
(2018) show that PER is neither necessary nor sufficient for GRS. Ai, Bansal, Guo, and Yaron
(2022) present a simple example of a GRS preference that displays a preference for either early or
late resolution of uncertainty (PER or PLR) depending on the value of the discount rate.
The key property of preference that is responsible for the asset pricing implications of long-run
risk models is GRS and not PER. In long-run risk models, news about the future affects continuation
utility and gives rise to variations in marginal utility. This property is generalized risk sensitivity,
as formalized in statement 2 in Theorem 1. GRS is responsible for long-run risk requiring a positive
risk premium. Under the assumption of constant elasticity, GRS is equivalent to PER, but if one
goes beyond the class of constant elasticity recursive utility models, long-run risk can be priced in a
model with PER or PLR as long as the preference satisfies GRS. The Ai, Bansal, Guo, and Yaron
12
=== PAGE 14 ===
(2022) paper provides such an example.
Although Theorem 1 focuses on representative-agent models, its basic insight extends to more
general setups. Models with heterogeneous agents but concave expected utility generate a zero
announcement premium as long as markets are complete and each agent’s subjective probability
coincides with the objective probability under which the risk premium is evaluated. This is so be-
cause, under the assumption of complete markets, asset prices can be derived from a representative
agent whose utility is a weighted average of all consumers’ utility functions. A weighted average of
expected utility is still an expected utility and therefore requires a zero announcement premium.
Incomplete markets are unlikely to change the conclusion of Theorem 1 either. For example, the
incomplete market model of Mankiw (1986) and Constantinides and Duffie (1996) implies a zero
announcement premium under expected utility. This is because incomplete markets do not change
the fact that the stochastic discount factor must equal the marginal rate of substitution of marginal
investors. In the Constantinides and Duffie (1996) model, the identity of marginal investors does not
change over time and certainly does not change upon a macroeconomic announcement. As a result,
as long as the aggregate resource constraint cannot change immediately upon announcements,
the consumption of marginal investors does not respond to announcements. There will be no
announcement premium under expected utility. The incomplete market model of Schmidt (2022),
Constantinides and Ghosh (2017), and Ai and Bhandari (2021) will generate an announcement
premium not because of incomplete markets but because these models feature recursive utility
functions with GRS.
The intermediary-based asset pricing models may or may not generate an announcement pre-
mium. The next section presents an intermediary-based asset pricing model that generates an an-
nouncement premium under expected utility. The key insight is that in the model, the Lagrangian
multiplier for the financial constraint becomes part of the stochastic discount factor. Because the
Lagrangian multiplier is forward looking in the sense that news about the future affects the tight-
ness of financial constraints, it acts like the partial derivatives with respect to continuation utility,n
∂I
∂Vs
oN
s=1
in Theorem 1 to produce an announcement premium. In general, intermediary-based
asset pricing models in which marginal investors are constrained, such as the model of Gertler
and Kiyotaki (2010) and Li and Xu (2022), can be consistent with an announcement premium
without requiring consumption to respond immediately to the announcement. Intermediary mod-
els in which marginal investors are unconstrained, such as He and Krishnamurthy (2012) and He
and Krishnamurthy (2013), do not generate an announcement premium unless the consumption
of marginal investors responds immediately to announcements. As discussed, the notion that in-
vestors’ consumption responds immediately and significantly to announcements is not empirically
supported.
An example of an intermediary-based asset pricing model Here, we present a two-period
version of the Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Li and Xu (2022) model to demonstrate that these
models can produce a positive announcement premium even though consumers have expected util-
13
=== PAGE 15 ===
ity.6 We continue with the setup discussed in Section 3. We modify the model to add financial
intermediation, as in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). The model has two groups of investors: house-
holds and intermediaries. The household can only invest in a risk-free bond that the intermediary
issues. The intermediary borrows from the household to invest in a dividend claim (i.e., stock).
The key feature of the model is that the intermediary faces a limited-commitment constraint and,
as a result, has limited borrowing capacity. The household takes the risk-free interest rate as given
and maximizes discounted utility:
max
{C−1,C0,C1},{b0,b1}
{u (C−1) + u (C0) + βE [u (C1)]}
C−1 + 1
Rf,0
b0 = Y−1 + W−1,
C0 + 1
Rf,1
b1 = Y0 + b0,
C1 = e1 + b1 + N1.
Here, Ct is consumption at time t, bt is a one-period risk-free bond that pays off one unit of
consumption in period t, and Rf,t is the risk-free interest rate on the bond. The household is
endowed with an initial wealth, W−1, and owns the aggregate output Y−1 and Y0 directly. The
ownership of the aggregate output in period 1, Y1, is divided between the household and the
intermediary: e1 + D1 = Y1, where e1 is household’s endowment and D1 is the part of the aggregate
output that the household owns indirectly through the intermediary. Here, we allow e1 ̸= 0 so that
aggregate consumption can be different from aggregate dividends. The household is the ultimate
owner of both the equity and the debt of the financial intermediary. First, it owns the equity of
the financial intermediary, N1, which pays out in period 1. 7 Second, the household also invests in
a risk-free bond issued by the intermediary. Here, W−1, Y−1, Y0, Y1, e1, D1 are exogenous variables,
and C−1, C0, C1, b0, b1 are endogenous choices of the household.
It is convenient to formulate the intermediary’s problem recursively. In period 0, given the
current-period net worth, n0, the intermediary maximizes
V (n0, s) = max
{α1,B1,n1}

E0

M 1n1
 s
	
(4)
α1Q0 = n0 + 1
Rf,1
B1,
n1 = α1D1 − B1,
E0

M 1n1
 s

≥ θα1Q0, (5)
6Ai, Li, Li, and Schlag (2020) and Ai, Li, and Yang (2020) also used similar models to study asset pricing problem
but without announcements.
7Here, without loss of generality, we do not allow the intermediary to pay any dividend in period −1 and period 0.
It is a standard result that the intermediary will not find it optimal to pay any dividend in period −1 or period 0 as
long as it is constrained. Alternatively, we can allow a dividend payment in all periods and impose a non-negativity
constraint on dividends.
14
=== PAGE 16 ===
where α1 is the number of shares of the stock that the intermediary brings into period 1, and B1 is
the principal value of risk-free debt that the intermediary brings into period 1. In this setup, the
financial intermediary takes the stochastic discount factor M 1, interest rates Rf,1, and the stock
price Q0 as given. It chooses the number of shares, α1, and the amount of bonds to issue to the
household, B1, to maximize the present value of its equity. The stock is a claim to dividendsD1 that
is paid in period 1. The constraint Es

M 1n1

≥ θα1Q0 is the limited-commitment constraint. The
interpretation is that at the end of period 0, the manager of the intermediary has an opportunity to
default on its liabilities. Upon default, the manager takes away a fraction θ of total assets without
repaying any debt back to the household. Such lack of commitment limits the intermediary’s
borrowing capacity. In equilibrium, the household will limit its lending to the intermediary so
that inequality (5) holds, and the intermediary never has an incentive to default. In period 0,
the announcement fully reveals the state s. The notation E0 [ ·| s] emphasizes that the expectation
depends on the announcement s.
In period −1, the intermediary solves a similar problem:
V (n−1) = max
{α0,B0,n0}

E−1

M 0V (n0, s)
	
(6)
α0Q−1 = n−1 + 1
Rf,0
B0,
n0 = α0Q0 − B0,
E−1

M 0n0

≥ θα0Q0, (7)
where V (n0) is the value function defined in (4).
The following market clearing conditions have to hold in equilibrium:
αt = 1; bt = Bt; nt = Nt, f or all t,
Ct = Yt, t= −1, 0
C1 = D1 + e1.
As in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), we require the stochastic discount factor to be consistent with
household consumption: M 0 = u′(C0)
u′(C−1) , and M 1 (s) = β u′(C1(s))
u′(C0) . In addition, as before, we assume
that the announcement at time 0 completely resolves all uncertainty about time 1, so that C1 (s)
is known at time 0.
We denote the present value of the firm dividend evaluated in period 0 using the stochastic
discount factor M 1 as ¯P0 (s). That is, ¯P0 (s) = β u′(C1(s))
u′(C0) D1 (s). As we will see, ¯P0 (s) is the
equilibrium price of the claim to dividends whenever the intermediary is not constrained, but will
be higher than the equilibrium price of dividends when the intermediary is constrained. We assume
that ¯P0 (s) is an increasing function of s, which is equivalent to assuming that the stock market is
pro-cyclical. Because ¯P0 (s) is a function of the parameters of the model, this allows us to provide
a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of an announcement premium.
15
=== PAGE 17 ===
Theorem 2. Suppose ¯P0 (s) is a strictly increasing function of s and the following condition holds:
1
1 − θ B0 > ¯P0 (1) > (1 + θ) B0. (8)
Then the announcement premium is strictly positive.
Proof. See appendix.
In this economy, whenever the intermediary does not have enough initial net worthN−1, it needs
to borrow from the household in order to purchase the claim to D1. As a result, one can think of
B0 as the initial condition of the economy. Equilibriums are indexed by B0. Small values of B0
imply that the intermediary has abundant equity and is therefore not constrained. Higher values of
B0 imply that the intermediary needs to borrow a large amount and that the limited-commitment
constraints are more likely to be binding.
The condition ¯P0 (1) > (1 + θ) B0 implies that the intermediary’s net worth is positive even upon
the lowest realization of s and guarantees the existence of equilibrium. The condition 1
1−θ B0 >
¯P0 (1) ensures that the limited-commitment constraint, E−1

M 0N0

≥ θ [α−1Q0], will be binding
for some realizations ofs, and as a result, generates an announcement premium that would otherwise
be zero because of the additively separable expected utility.
To understand Theorem 2, we set up the Lagrangian for the period 0 maximization problem:
V (n0, s) = max

Es

M 1 {α1D1 − Rf,1 [α1Q0 − n0]}

+λ (s)

Es

M 1 {α1D1 − Rf,1 [α1Q0 − n0]}

− θ [α1Q0]
		
. (9)
The envelope condition implies V ′ (n0) = 1+λ (s), where the Lagrangian multiplierλ is a function of
the announcement s in period 0. It is also clear that V (n0, s) is linear in n0 because of homogeneity
of the objective function and the constraints. As a result, we can write V (n0, s) = [1 + λ (s)] n0.
In the appendix, we show that λ is a non-increasing function of s and is non-zero at least for some
s under the condition (8).
To derive an expression for the announcement premium, it is convenient to assume that the
limited-commitment constraint (7) does not bind. 8 In this case, using the optimality condition for
the period −1 problem, we have
E

M 0 {1 + λ (s)} Q0
Q−1

= E

M 0 {1 + λ (s)} Rf,0

. (10)
Clearly, M 0 {1 + λ (s)} is the stochastic discount factor that prices announcement returns and the
8This assumption simplifies the asset pricing equation, but as we will show in the appendix, it does not affect the
conclusion in Theorem 2.
16
=== PAGE 18 ===
announcement premium can be written as:
E
h
Q0
Q−1
i
− Rf,0
Rf,0
= −Cov
 M 0 {1 + λ (s)}
E [M 0 {1 + λ (s)}] , Q0
Q−1

.
As a result of expected utility, M 0 = u′(C0)
u′(C−1) does not depend on the content of the announcement.
However, λ (s) does whenever the constraint (5) binds. The assumption 1
1−θ B0 > ¯P0 (1) guarantees
that λ (s) will be strictly positive at least in some states of the world. Because lower realizations
of s are associated with a tighter limited-commitment constraint, the variations in λ (s) generate
an announcement premium despite the expected utility.
This model features a positive announcement premium despite the expected utility. In the case
in which the borrowing constraint (5) might be binding in some states in the future, the marginal
benefit of the intermediary’s net worth in those states is increasing in the tightness of the borrowing
constraint. As a result, the Lagrangian multiplier on the constraint acts like a stochastic discount
factor: returns that are negatively correlated with the tightness of the borrowing constraint require
a premium. Upon a macroeconomic announcement, even though aggregate consumption does not
react immediately, news about the future forecasts the tightness of the borrowing constraint. As
a result, returns correlated with the tightness of this constraint require a risk compensation prior
to the announcement. Although this mechanism does not require generalized risk sensitivity in
preferences, the economic intuition is similar: it requires the marginal utility of marginal investors to
vary with the context of the announcement. In the case of generalized risk sensitivity, this variation
originates from information about continuation utility. In this financial intermediary model, this
variation originates from the information about the tightness of the borrowing constraint. Both
mechanisms add a forward-looking component, as ∂I
∂Vs in Equation (3), to the stochastic discount
factor that prices the risk associated with announcements.
It is worth noting that the Lagrangian multiplier being part of the pricing kernel typically does
not occur in models with deeper micro-foundations. As shown by Ai and Bhandari (2021), in models
in which financial constraints arise as a result of agency frictions, the marginal rate of substitution
of constrained agents is typically not a valid stochastic discount factor. It is the marginal rate of
substitution of unconstrained agents that prices assets in their model. In these setups, GRS will
still be important for modeling announcement premiums. In addition, Ai, Bansal, Guo, and Yaron
(2022) present an additional set of tests for GRS and PER. It is not clear that the pricing kernel
in this financial intermediary mode can pass these additional tests.
Incorporating generalized risk sensitivity into economic analysis The empirical fact of
a macroeconomic announcement premium highlights the importance of incorporating preferences
with GRS into dynamic economic models. Several classes of models with GRS have been widely
applied to economic analysis. See Ilut and Schneider (2022) for a review of the application of the
multiple prior expected utility model in economic analysis. See Hansen and Sargent (2007) for a
textbook treatment of robust control models and their applications in economics. The defining
17
=== PAGE 19 ===
property of GRS preferences is that marginal utility is decreasing in continuation utility. This
section reviews papers that demonstrate the importance of this property of GRS preferences in
economic analysis.
The property of GRS that marginal utility is decreasing in continuation utility is perhaps
best highlighted in the long-run risk literature. In expected utility based asset pricing models,
variations in marginal utility must be associated with changes in current-period consumption. The
equity premium puzzle arises in expected utility based asset pricing models because the volatility
in the growth rate of aggregate consumption is small, roughly on the order of 2% per year in
U.S. post-war data. As a result, the variations in the marginal rate of substitution of investors
are too small to generate a sizable equity premium under expected utility unless one is willing to
assume implausibly high levels of risk aversion. Furthermore, an expected utility based model,
when calibrated to match the overall level of equity premium, will be inconsistent with the pattern
of the realization of an equity premium documented in Table 1. Virtually all equity premium
will be realized on non-announcement days in expected utility based asset pricing models, and the
announcement premium will be zero.
The key mechanism in long-run risk models is that information about future consumption and
continuation utility affects marginal utility as a result of GRS. This can be information about the
future growth rate, as in Case I of the Bansal and Yaron (2004) model, or information about the
volatility of future consumption, as in Case II of the Bansal and Yaron (2004) model, or information
about higher moments of consumption growth, as in recursive utility based rare disaster models—
for example, Wachter (2013). Most other non-expected utility based asset pricing models generate
a high equity premium for the same reason. See, for example, the recursive multiple prior model of
Chen and Epstein (2002), the robust control model of Hansen and Sargent (2010), and the smooth
ambiguity based asset pricing model of Ju and Miao (2012). Many authors have applied GRS
preferences to study production and asset pricing in a unified setup (Croce (2006), Kaltenbrunner
and Lochstoer (2010), Ai, Croce, and Li (2013)), carry trade (Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Lustig
and Verdelhan (2011), Ilut (2012)), CDS spreads and sovereign debt spreads (Boyarchenko (2012),
Pouzo and Presno (2016), Seo and Wachter (2018)), and option pricing and the variance risk
premium (Drechsler and Yaron (2011), Drechsler (2013), Miao, Wei, and Zhou (2019), Seo and
Wachter (2019)).
The fact that under GRS, marginal utility is affected by information about the future also
has important implications for modeling exchange rates and international risk sharing. Expected
utility based models have many counterfactual implications on exchange rate dynamics. Under the
assumption of complete markets, real exchange rates between any two currencies must be equal
to the ratio of marginal utilities of investors from their respective countries. If both investors
have expected utility, the ratio of marginal utility must be perfectly correlated with the ratio of
consumption growth. This observation has two implications. First, recessions in the home country,
which lead to drops in home country consumption relative to foreign countries, must be associated
with simultaneous appreciations of the home currency. Second, the low correlation of consumption
18
=== PAGE 20 ===
growth rates across countries also implies that the stochastic discount factor across countries cannot
be highly correlated. The first implication leads to the Backus and Smith (1993) puzzle, which is
the empirical fact that recessions are often associated with currency depreciation, not appreciation.
The second implication leads to the Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa-Clara (2006) puzzle, which is
the observation that the high volatility of the stochastic discount factor and the relatively low
volatility of exchange rates cannot be consistent with each other unless stochastic discount factors
across countries are highly correlated.
Colacito and Croce (2011) demonstrate that these two puzzles can be reconciled in models with
recursive utility in which news about the future affects marginal utilities. In their model, news
about continuation utility drives most of the volatility in the stochastic discount factor, which
breaks the link between current-period consumption growth and the exchange rate variations and
resolves the Backus-Smith puzzle. In addition, because of international risk sharing, long-run
consumption across countries is highly correlated and accounts for the high correlation between
the stochastic discount factors across countries. Furthermore, the failure of uncovered interest rate
parity (Fama (1984)) and the profitability of carry trade (Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011)
and Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2014)) imply that risk premium variations are important
in understanding exchange rate dynamics. Colacito and Croce (2013) and Colacito, Croce, Ho,
and Howard (2018) develop recursive preference based asset pricing models in which GRS plays an
important role in accounting for the risk premium dynamics in exchange rates.
GRS also plays an important role in the study of climate finance. Risk preferences have signif-
icant qualitative and quantitative implications for the Social Cost of Carbon (SCC) and therefore
for the optimal policy response to climate change. Examples of this include Bansal, Kiku, and
Ochoa (2016), Lemoine and Traeger (2014), and Barnett, Brock, and Hansen (2020, 2022). Risk-
sensitive preferences typically raise the SCC as the long-run climate change path introduces greater
long-term uncertainty, ambiguity, or both. In empirical implementations of some of these models
with recursive preferences that satisfy the property of GRS, the long-run climate uncertainty affects
the short-run risk-return trade-offs in asset prices; this feature of specific versions of risk-sensitive
preferences is exploited in Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa (2016) and Barnett (2023) to study the impact
of climate change on asset prices.
Preferences with the GRS property have also been demonstrated to be relevant for the study of
optimal policy and optimal contracting. Kwon and Miao (2019) study robust taxation problems in
a linear-quadratic framework. In a Ramsey taxation problem with recursive utility, Karantounias
(2018) demonstrates that the fact that marginal utility depends on continuation utility implies that
a benevolent government has an incentive to introduce intertemporal distortions that can lead to an
ex ante capital subsidy. Karantounias (2020) provides a review of the literature on optimal policy
design under preferences that features model uncertainty, a subclass of preferences that satisfy
GRS. Woodford (2010) studies optimal monetary policy under robustness preferences. Kwon and
Miao (2019) extend Woodford (2010)’s analysis to a general linear quadratic framework. Miao and
Rivera (2016) study an optimal dynamic contracting problem with ambiguity-averse preferences.
19
=== PAGE 21 ===
5 Information and asset market reactions
The central theme of the theory and evidence on the macroeconomic announcement premium is
that information about macroeconomic uncertainty affects asset market returns and requires risk
compensation. This section reviews recent literature that provides theory and evidence for how
asset markets respond to information in macroeconomic announcements.
Asset market response to macroeconomic announcements Many authors have studied
how asset markets respond to monetary policy announcements. Examples include Kuttner (2001),
G¨ urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005), Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Hanson and Stein (2015),
Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019), Swanson (2021), Hillenbrand (2021), G¨ urkaynak, Karasoy-Can, and
Lee (2022), Bianchi, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2022), and Bianchi, Ludvigson, and Ma (2022).
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) document that an unanticipated 25-basis-point cut in the Federal
Funds Rate target is associated with a 1% increase in the stock index, highlighting the impact
that the Fed has on the risk premium of the stock market. Hanson and Stein (2015) demonstrate
that a 100-basis-point increase in the two-year nominal yield on an FOMC announcement day
is typically associated with a 42-basis-point increase in the 10-year forward real rate. Focusing
on major macroeconomic announcements, which include all five announcements used to calculate
the announcement premium in Table 1, Elenev, Law, Song, and Yaron (2022) document that the
sensitivity of the stock market reaction to major macroeconomic news announcements (MNAs)
is countercyclical and depends on the expectation of monetary policy. Using using stock returns
and Treasury yield changes, Cieslak and Pang (2021) decompose economic shocks into monetary,
growth, and risk premium news and examine investors’ responses to news from the Fed and key
macro announcements. Gomez Cram and Olbert (2023) use asset price changes within minutes of
a major global tax reform announcement to estimate its impact on shareholder value.
Many authors advocate using asset returns during short FOMC announcement windows to iden-
tify unexpected monetary policy shocks. Examples include Cook and Hahn (1989), Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2002), Nakamura and Steinsson (2018a), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018b). The ad-
vantage of this approach is that during a short time interval—for example, a half-hour window—the
announcement is likely to be the only significant event that affects investor expectations. Nakamura
and Steinsson (2018a) document a “Fed information effect”—that is, the fact that the FOMC has
private information about economic fundamentals, and announcements reveal the private infor-
mation.9 Jaroci´ nski and Karadi (2020) decompose FOMC announcements into a monetary policy
surprise component and a central bank information component. Bauer and Swanson (2023) chal-
lenge the “Fed information effect” by arguing that it may actually arise from a “Fed responds to
news” effect. They show that the “Fed information effect” can be attributed to the predictabil-
ity of the high-frequency asset market responses to FOMC announcements. The predictability of
9Romer and Romer (2000) are the first to document a Fed information effect. Faust, Swanson, and Wright (2004)
and Campbell, Evans, Fisher, and Justiniano (2012) also study the Fed information effect, although none of them
use high-frequency market reactions to FOMC announcements.
20
=== PAGE 22 ===
the high-frequency identified shocks complicates their interpretations and weakens their validity as
measures of shocks to expectations.
Information and risk compensation If macroeconomic announcements require risk compensa-
tion because they resolve uncertainty, it is natural to ask whether a higher uncertainty reduction is
associated with a larger magnitude of the announcement premium. Theoretically, Ai, Han, and Xu
(2022) show that under a slightly stronger condition than GRS, which they call strong generalized
risk sensitivity, the magnitude of the announcement premium increases with the informativeness of
announcements.
To test this implication, a natural measure of the informativeness of announcements is the drop
in implied volatility upon the announcements. Intuitively, option-implied volatility reflects the
market’s expected forward-looking volatility during the maturity of the option. Rational expec-
tation implies that the drop in implied volatility upon the announcement represents the market’s
expectation of the uncertainty reduction associated with the announcement. In the data, as shown
by Ghaderi and Seo (2021), larger drops in implied volatility are typically associated with higher
realizations of announcement returns. However, Ghaderi and Seo (2021) argue that such a re-
lation between an implied volatility drop and announcement returns may simply be due to the
well-known “leverage effect,” the fact that stock returns and implied volatility are highly neg-
atively correlated. Testing the relation between the informativeness of announcements and the
announcement premium requires an-ex ante measure of informativeness. Several papers have de-
veloped ex ante measures that relate FOMC announcement returns to uncertainty and uncertainty
reduction. Fisher, Martineau, and Sheng (2022) put forth a novel macroeconomic attention index
and show that attention to macroeconomic news increases before major macroeconomic announce-
ments. They demonstrate that announcements with greater ex ante attention earn higher risk
premiums and experience larger declines in VIX. Hu, Pan, Wang, and Zhu (2022) demonstrate
that elevated uncertainty before FOMC announcements is associated with higher realizations of
announcement returns. Jacobs, Ke, and Pan (2022) demonstrate that option-implied volatility
ahead of announcements predicts pre-FOMC announcement drift and option-implied higher mo-
ments predict post-FOMC announcement returns. Liu, Tang, and Zhou (2022) provide an option
price based measure of the FOMC announcement premium. They show that their measure pre-
dicts the FOMC announcement premium with an R2 of about 7 .51%. Ai, Han, and Xu (2022)
develop an option price based measure of informativeness and demonstrate that their measure of
informativeness also predicts FOMC announcement returns. Zhang and Zhao (2022) show that
the risk premium is high when the risk is high, as in standard asset pricing models, but the risk
premium is low when information uncertainty is high. The findings are consistent with the notion
that information uncertainty hampers the effectiveness of learning.
Many authors have also documented other return predictability patterns around announce-
ments. Boguth, Gr´ egoire, and Martineau (2019) show that for a period of a few years, half of the
FOMC announcements are accompanied by a post-announcement press conference, and the FOMC
21
=== PAGE 23 ===
announcement premium moves to fully concentrate on these announcements. They argue that this
effect occurs because the Fed endogenously announces more important decisions when they know
they can elaborate on them in a follow-up press conference. Gomez-Cram and Grotteria (2022)
show that for several asset classes, price movements around the post-FOMC meeting statement
release are strong predictors of price movements around the subsequent press conference. Boguth,
Fisher, Gregoire, and Martineau (2023) document a pattern of return reversal after announcements.
They show that a high announcement-day return is often associated with a lower realized return
afterward. This phenomenon is potentially consistent with the interpretation that a higher uncer-
tainty reduction on an announcement day is associated with a higher announcement premium and
lower uncertainty and a lower average return afterward. Savor and Wilson (2014) and Gafka, Sa-
vor, and Wilson (2021) demonstrate that realized variance at the quarterly level positively predicts
next-quarter returns on announcement days but not those on non-announcement days.
Several authors have provided evidence for the link between information and risk compensation
from the cross section of expected returns. Ben-Rephael, Carlin, Da, and Israelsen (2021) demon-
strate that firms that are more sensitive to macroeconomic information receive a higher premium
on earnings announcement days and macroeconomic announcement days. Ai, Han, Pan, and Xu
(2022) demonstrate that firms that are more sensitive to monetary policy announcements receive a
high premium on FOMC announcement days. Guo, Hung, Kontonikas, and Zeng (2020) show that
the pre-FOMC announcement drifts are more pronounced on lottery-like stocks.
Earnings announcements Like macroeconomic announcements, firm earnings announcements
are (mostly) pre-scheduled events that resolve important uncertainty for investors. This section
does not attempt to review the full set of literature on every aspect of earnings announcements
(e.g., we will leave the important topics of PEAD and ERC out). Rather, we focus on the particular
branch studying the average stock returns around the earnings announcements. Beaver (1968) and
Ball and Kothari (1991) are among the early papers to document the high average excess stock
returns around the issuing firms’ earnings announcement. This feature seems robust, present in
both the U.S. and the global market (Barber, De George, Lehavy, and Trueman (2013)). Earlier
works, explicitly or implicitly, relate this premium to investors’ (in)attention (e.g., Frazzini and
Lamont (2007)), market frictions (e.g., Berkman, Dimitrov, Jain, Koch, and Tice (2009), So and
Wang (2014)), biased information (e.g., Kothari, Shu, and Wysocki (2009)), and idiosyncratic risks
(e.g., Barber, De George, Lehavy, and Trueman (2013), Barth and So (2014)).
Patton and Verardo (2012) and Savor and Wilson (2016) link earnings announcements to the
resolution of systematic risks and provide a general equilibrium interpretation of the earnings an-
nouncement premium. Savor and Wilson (2016) present a formal asset pricing model in which
individual firms’ earnings share a common, aggregate component and investors rationally learn
about aggregate cash flow news from individual earnings announcements. They, like many other
researchers, use multiple days around the (expected) earnings announcement dates as the announce-
ment window. Using the precise announcement dates and times, Barber, De George, Lehavy, and
22
=== PAGE 24 ===
Trueman (2013) and Johnson and So (2018) document that high earnings announcement returns
occur only before the actual announcement day and in fact partially reverse afterward. In other
words, there is also a pre-announcement drift for earnings announcements. Liu, Wang, Yu, and
Zhao (2020) further show that the size of the drift is linked to a few lottery-like features of the
stocks. Akey, Gr´ egoire, and Martineau (2022) examine stock market behaviors before hacked earn-
ings announcements over a five-year episode. Heitz, Narayanamoorthy, and Zekhnini (2020) show
that the earnings announcement premium is disappearing in the U.S. in recent years, even though it
remains robust in the international markets. Chen, Cohen, and Wang (2020) show that the evenings
in which a group of famous, large firms announce their earnings in close temporal proximity, which
they call earnings clusters, carry a pre-announcement drift in the aggregate stock market.
6 Conclusion and open questions
The macroeconomic announcement premium provides empirical support for general equilibrium
macro asset pricing models as well as the study of non-expected utility. The basic premise of
macro asset pricing models is that the equity premium reflects compensation for macroeconomic
risk. The fact that most of the equity market risk premium is realized on days where uncertainty
about the macroeconomy is resolved provides strong evidence for the importance of macroeconomic
risk in affecting equity market risk compensation. However, not all macro asset pricing models are
consistent with the macroeconomic announcement premium. The Theorem of Generalized Risk
Sensitivity implies that expected utility based models leads to a zero announcement premium.
To generate a positive announcement premium, one needs generalized risk sensitivity. GRS is
a property of preference that is satisfied in many non-expected utility models. The evidence of
an announcement premium highlights the need for incorporating non-expected utility analysis in
economic modeling. Several directions for future research are promising.
Decision theoretic foundations for GRS GRS is a property of preferences derived from asset
prices. What does it imply for the choice behavior of decision making under uncertainty? What
is the relationship between GRS and behavioral violations of expected utility theory, such as the
Ellsberg paradox (Ellsberg (1961))? Understanding these questions requires the development of an
axiomatic foundation for GRS in terms of choice behavior. Such development will also help unify
the study of asset pricing and decision making under uncertainty.
Using asset prices to infer properties of preferences The basic idea of the Theorem of
Generalized Risk Sensitivity is to infer properties of preferences from asset prices. The approach
taken by Ai and Bansal (2018) is to use asset prices to identify properties of marginal utilities
and use the property of marginal utilities to recover the property of preferences. GRS provides a
particularly useful tool to identify preferences from asset prices. As shown in Theorem 1 under
the assumption of GRS, the order of utility level is exactly the inverse of the order of marginal
utilities. Because asset prices can be used to identify the order of marginal utilities, GRS provides
23
=== PAGE 25 ===
a promising approach to link properties of preferences to asset prices. Given the evidence of the
macroeconomic announcement premium, GRS also seems to be a reasonable starting point for such
analysis.
Ai, Bansal, Guo, and Yaron (2022) is an example of using asset prices to identify a property
of preference, namely, preference for the timing of resolution of uncertainty, by taking advantage
of the assumption of GRS. They provide a characterization of PER in terms of asset prices and
use evidence from financial markets to identify investors’ preference for the timing of resolution
of uncertainty. The decision theoretical literature has emphasized the importance of many other
properties of choice behavior under uncertainty, such as uncertainty aversion and various notions
of the independence axiom (the certainty independence axiom of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989)
and the weak certainty independence axiom of Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006a), for
example). Theorem 1 can potentially be used to link these properties of preferences to asset prices.
Monetary policy and stock market reactions Of all macroeconomic announcements, the
FOMC announcement is arguably the most important one. It accounts for the largest fraction of
the announcement premium out of all macroeconomic announcements. According to Theorem 1,
under generalized risk sensitivity, the FOMC announcement requires a premium because it resolves
uncertainty about the future of the macroeconomy. Quantitatively, to generate a significant FOMC
announcement premium, FOMC announcements need to have a long-run impact on the economy.
Why do FOMC announcements have a long-run impact on the economy? Is this because monetary
policy itself has a long-run impact on the economy and the announcements resolve uncertainty
about the monetary policy? An alternative hypothesis is the “Fed information effect.” That is,
monetary policy announcements reveal the FOMC’s private information about the growth prospect
of the macroeconomy. Understanding the micro-foundation for the FOMC announcement premium
requires the development of asset pricing models with a non-trivial monetary component and re-
quires the incorporation of the FOMC announcement premium, together with other macro and
asset pricing facts, into a coherent general equilibrium framework.
24
=== PAGE 26 ===
References
Abdi, Farshid, and Botao Wu, 2018, Pre-FOMC Information Asymmetry, Working paper.
Abel, Andrew, 1990, Asset Prices Under Habit Formation And Catching Up With The Joneses, American
Economic Review 80, 38–42.
Ai, Hengjie, and Ravi Bansal, 2018, Risk Preferences and the Macroeconomic Announcement Premium,
Econometrica 86, 1383–1430.
Ai, Hengjie, Ravi Bansal, Hongye Guo, and Amir Yaron, 2022, Identifying preference for early resolution
from asset prices, Working paper.
Ai, Hengjie, Ravi Bansal, and Leyla Han, 2022, information acquisition and the pre-announcement drift,
Unpublished Working Paper .
Ai, Hengjie, and Anmol Bhandari, 2021, Asset Pricing With Endogenously Uninsurable Tail Risk, Econo-
metrica 89, 1471–1505.
Ai, Hengjie, Mariano Massimiliano Croce, and Kai Li, 2013, Toward a Quantitative General Equilibrium
Asset Pricing Model with Intangible Capital, The Review of Financial Studies 26, 491–530.
Ai, Hengjie, Leyla Jianyu Han, Xuhui Nick Pan, and Lai Xu, 2022, The cross section of the monetary policy
announcement premium, Journal of Financial Economics 143, 247–276.
Ai, Hengjie, Leyla Jianyu Han, and Lai Xu, 2022, Information-Driven Volatility, Working paper.
Ai, Hengjie, Jun E Li, Kai Li, and Christian Schlag, 2020, The Collateralizability Premium, The Review of
Financial Studies 33, 5821–5855.
Ai, Hengjie, Kai Li, and Fang Yang, 2020, Financial intermediation and capital reallocation, Journal of
Financial Economics 138, 663–686.
Akey, Pat, Vincent Gr´ egoire, and Charles Martineau, 2022, Price revelation from insider trading: Evidence
from hacked earnings news, Journal of Financial Economics 143, 1162–1184.
Andrei, Daniel, Julien Cujean, and Mungo Wilson, 2023, The Lost Capital Asset Pricing Model, The Review
of Economic Studies.
Backus, David K., and Gregor W. Smith, 1993, Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic economies
with non-traded goods, Journal of International Economics 35, 297–316.
Ball, Ray, and S. P. Kothari, 1991, Security Returns around Earnings Announcements, The Accounting
Review 66, 718–738.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Marcelo Ochoa, 2016, Price of Long-Run Temperature Shifts in Capital
Markets, Working paper.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
Puzzles, The Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
25
=== PAGE 27 ===
Barber, Brad M., Emmanuel T. De George, Reuven Lehavy, and Brett Trueman, 2013, The earnings an-
nouncement premium around the globe, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 118–138.
Barnett, Michael, 2023, Climate Change and Uncertainty: An Asset Pricing Perspective, Management Sci-
ence.
Barnett, Michael, William Brock, and Lars Peter Hansen, 2020, Pricing Uncertainty Induced by Climate
Change, The Review of Financial Studies 33, 1024–1066.
Barnett, Michael, William Brock, and Lars Peter Hansen, 2022, Climate Change Uncertainty Spillover in
the Macroeconomy, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 36, 253–320.
Barro, Robert J., 2006, Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century, The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 121, 823–866.
Barth, Mary E., and Eric C. So, 2014, Non-Diversifiable Volatility Risk and Risk Premiums at Earnings
Announcements, The Accounting Review 89, 1579–1607 Publisher: American Accounting Association.
Bauer, Michael D., and Eric T. Swanson, 2023, An Alternative Explanation for the “Fed Information Effect”,
American Economic Review 113, 664–700.
Beaver, William H., 1968, The Information Content of Annual Earnings Announcements, Journal of Ac-
counting Research 6, 67–92.
Beeler, Jason, and John Y. Campbell, 2011, The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate Asset Prices: An
Empirical Assessment, Critical Finance Review 1, 141–182.
Ben-Rephael, Azi, Bruce I. Carlin, Zhi Da, and Ryan D. Israelsen, 2021, Information Consumption and
Asset Pricing, The Journal of Finance 76, 357–394.
Berkman, Henk, Valentin Dimitrov, Prem C. Jain, Paul D. Koch, and Sheri Tice, 2009, Sell on the news:
Differences of opinion, short-sales constraints, and returns around earnings announcements, Journal of
Financial Economics 92, 376–399.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner, 2005, What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal
Reserve Policy?, The Journal of Finance LX, 1221–1257.
Bernile, Gennaro, Jianfeng Hu, and Yuehua Tang, 2016, Can information be locked up? Informed trading
ahead of macro-news announcements, Journal of Financial Economics 121, 496–520.
Bianchi, Francesco, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2022, Monetary Policy and Asset Valuation,
The Journal of Finance 77, 967–1017.
Bianchi, Francesco, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma, 2022, Monetary-Based Asset Pricing: A Mixed-
Frequency Structural Approach, Working paper.
Boguth, Oliver, Adlai Fisher, Vincent Gregoire, and Charles Martineau, 2023, Price Informativeness and
FOMC Return Reversals, Unpublished Working Paper.
Boguth, Oliver, Vincent Gr´ egoire, and Charles Martineau, 2019, Shaping Expectations and Coordinating
Attention: The Unintended Consequences of FOMC Press Conferences, Journal of Financial and Quan-
titative Analysis 54, 2327–2353.
26
=== PAGE 28 ===
Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence Christiano, and Jonas Fisher, 2001a, Habit persistence, asset returns, and the
business cycle, American Economic Review 91, 149–166.
Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 2001b, Habit Persistence, Asset Returns,
and the Business Cycle, American Economic Review 91, 149–166.
Boyarchenko, Nina, 2012, Ambiguity shifts and the 2007–2008 financial crisis, Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics 59, 493–507.
Brandt, Michael W., John H. Cochrane, and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2006, International risk sharing is better
than you think, or exchange rates are too smooth, Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 671–698.
Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption and Invest-
ment Opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265–296.
Brusa, Francesca, Pavel Savor, and Mungo Wilson, 2020, One Central Bank to Rule Them All, Review of
Finance 24, 263–304.
Campbell, Jeffrey, Charles Evans, Jonas Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano, 2012, Macroeconomic Effects of
Federal Reserve Forward Guidance, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 43, 1–80.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By Force of Habit: A Consumption-based Explanation of
Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–255.
Chen, Yixin, Randolph B. Cohen, and Zixuan (Kevin) Wang, 2020, Famous Firms, Earnings Clusters, and
the Stock Market, Working paper.
Chen, Zengjing, and Larry Epstein, 2002, Ambiguity, Risk, and Asset Returns in Continuous Time, Econo-
metrica 70, 1403–1443.
Cieslak, Anna, Adair Morse, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2019, Stock Returns over the FOMC Cycle,
The Journal of Finance 74, 2201–2248.
Cieslak, Anna, and Hao Pang, 2021, Common shocks in stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics
142, 880–904.
Cieslak, Anna, and Andreas Schrimpf, 2019, Non-monetary news in central bank communication, Journal
of International Economics 118, 293–315.
Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi, 2002, The Fed and Interest Rates - A High-Frequency Identification,
American Economic Review 92, 90–95.
Cocoma, Paula, 2018, Explaining the Pre-Announcement Drift, Working paper.
Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano Massimiliano Croce, 2011, Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange
Rate, The Journal of Political Economy 119, 153–181.
Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano M. Croce, 2013, International Asset Pricing with Recursive Preferences,
The Journal of Finance 68, 2651–2686.
Colacito, Riccardo, Mariano M. Croce, Steven Ho, and Philip Howard, 2018, BKK the EZ Way: International
Long-Run Growth News and Capital Flows, The American Economic Review 108, 3416–3449.
27
=== PAGE 29 ===
Constantinides, George, and Darrell Duffie, 1996, Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers, Journal of
Political Economy 104, 219–40.
Constantinides, George M., 1990, Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle, The
Journal of Political Economy 98, 519–543.
Constantinides, George M., and Anisha Ghosh, 2017, Asset Pricing with Countercyclical Household Con-
sumption Risk, The Journal of Finance 72, 415–460.
Cook, Timothy, and Thomas Hahn, 1989, The effect of changes in the federal funds rate target on market
interest rates in the 1970s, Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 331–351.
Croce, Mariano M., 2006, Welfare Costs, Long Run Consumption Risk, and a Production Economy, 2006
Meeting Papers Number: 582 Publisher: Society for Economic Dynamics.
Drechsler, Itamar, 2013, Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices, The Journal of Finance 68,
1843–1889.
Drechsler, Itamar, and Amir Yaron, 2011, What’s Vol Got to Do with It, Review of Financial Studies 24,
1–45.
Dunn, Kenneth, and Kenneth Singleton, 1986, Modeling The Term Structure of Interest Rates under Non-
Separable Utility and Durability of Goods, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 27–55.
Elenev, Vadim, Tzuo Hann Law, Dongho Song, and Amir Yaron, 2022, Fearing the Fed: How Wall Street
Reads Main Street, Working paper.
Ellsberg, Daniel, 1961, Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 75,
643–669.
Epstein, Larry, and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Con-
sumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework, Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Ernst, Rory, Thomas Gilbert, and Christopher M. Hrdlicka, 2019, More Than 100% of the Equity Premium:
How Much Is Really Earned on Macroeconomic Announcement Days?, Working paper.
Fama, Eugene F., 1984, Forward and spot exchange rates, Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 319–338.
Faust, Jon, Eric Swanson, and Jonathan Wright, 2004, Identifying V ARS based on high frequency futures
data, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1107–1131.
Fisher, Adlai, Charles Martineau, and Jinfei Sheng, 2022, Macroeconomic Attention and Announcement
Risk Premia, The Review of Financial Studies 35, 5057–5093.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A. Lamont, 2007, The Earnings Announcement Premium and Trading Volume,
Working paper.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in Macro-
Finance, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645–700.
Gafka, Beata, Pavel G. Savor, and Mungo Ivor Wilson, 2021, Sources of Return Predictability, .
28
=== PAGE 30 ===
Gallant, A. Ronald, Lars Peter Hansen, and George Tauchen, 1990, Using Conditional Moments of Asset
Payoffs to Infer The Volatility of Intertemporal Marginal Rates of Substitution, Journal of Econometrics
45, 141–179.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2010, Chapter 11 - Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis, in Benjamin M. Friedman, and Michael Woodford, eds.: Handbook of Monetary
Economics (Elsevier, ).
Ghaderi, Mohammad, and Sang Byung Seo, 2021, Is There a Macro-Announcement Premium?, Working
paper.
Gilboa, Itzhak, and David Schmeidler, 1989, Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior, Journal of
Mathematical Economics 18, 141–153.
Gomez-Cram, Roberto, and Marco Grotteria, 2022, Real-time price discovery via verbal communication:
Method and application to Fedspeak, Journal of Financial Economics 143, 993–1025.
Gomez Cram, Roberto, and Marcel Olbert, 2023, Measuring the Expected Effects of the Global Tax Reform,
Working paper.
Gul, Faruk, 1991, A Theory of Disappointment Aversion, Econometrica 59, 667–686.
Guo, Haifeng, Chi-Hsiou Daniel Hung, Alexandros Kontonikas, and Yeqin Zeng, 2020, Flight to Lottery
Ahead of FOMC Announcements, Working paper.
Guo, Rui, Dun Jia, and Xi Sun, 2022, Information Acquisition, Uncertainty Reduction, and Pre-
Announcement Premium in China, Review of Finance pp. 1–42.
G¨ urkaynak, Refet, Hatice Gok¸ ce Karasoy-Can, and Sang Seok Lee, 2022, Stock Market’s Assessment of
Monetary Policy Transmission: The Cash Flow Effect, The Journal of Finance 77, 2375–2421.
G¨ urkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson, 2005, Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? The
Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements, International Journal of Central
Banking 1.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008, Consumption Strikes Back? Measuring Long-Run
Risk., Journal of Political Economy 116, 260–302.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2005, Robust Estimation and Control under Commitment,
Journal of Economic Theory 124, 258–301.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2007, Recursive Robust Estimation and Control without Com-
mitment, Journal of Economic Theory 136, 1–27.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2010, Fragile beliefs and the price of model uncertainty, Quan-
titative Economics 1, 129–162.
Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, Monetary policy and long-term real rates, Journal of
Financial Economics 115, 429–448.
29
=== PAGE 31 ===
Hayashi, Takashi, and Jianjun Miao, 2011, Intertemporal Substitution and Recursive Smooth Ambiguity
Preferences, Theoretical Economics 121, 496–520.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2012, A Model of Capital and Crises, The Review of Economic
Studies 79, 735–777.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary Asset Pricing, American Economic Review 103,
732–770.
Heaton, John, 1993, The Interaction between Time-Nonseparable Preferences and Time Aggregation, Econo-
metrica 61, 353–385.
Heitz, Amanda, Ganapathi S. Narayanamoorthy, and Morad Zekhnini, 2020, The Disappearing Earnings
Announcement Premium, Working paper.
Hillenbrand, Sebastian, 2021, The Fed and the Secular Decline in Interest Rates, Working paper.
Hu, Grace Xing, Jun Pan, Jiang Wang, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2022, Premium for Heightened Uncertainty:
Explaining Pre-announcement Market Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 145, 909–936.
Ilut, Cosmin, 2012, Ambiguity Aversion: Implications for the Uncovered Interest Rate Parity Puzzle, Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 33–65.
Ilut, Cosmin, and Martin Schneider, 2022, Modeling Uncertainty as Ambiguity: A Review, Working paper.
Jacobs, Kris, Sai Ke, and Xuhui (Nick) Pan, 2022, Tail Risk around FOMC Announcements, Working paper.
Jaroci´ nski, Marek, and Peter Karadi, 2020, Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises—The Role of Infor-
mation Shocks, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12, 1–43.
Johnson, Travis L., and Eric C. So, 2018, Asymmetric Trading Costs Prior to Earnings Announcements:
Implications for Price Discovery and Returns, Journal of Accounting Research 56, 217–263.
Ju, Nengjiu, and Jianjun Miao, 2012, Ambiguity, Learning, and Asset Returns, Econometrica 80, 559–591.
Kaltenbrunner, Georg, and Lars A. Lochstoer, 2010, Long-Run Risk through Consumption Smoothing, The
Review of Financial Studies 23, 3190–3224.
Karantounias, Anastasios G., 2018, Optimal Fiscal Policy with Recursive Preferences, Review of Economic
Studies 85, 2283–2317.
Karantounias, Anastasios G., 2020, Model uncertainty and policy design, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s
Policy Hub.
Klibanoff, Peter, Massimo Marinacci, and Sujoy Mukerji, 2005, A Smooth Model of Decision Making under
Ambiguity, Econometrica 73, 1849–1892.
Klibanoff, Peter, Massimo Marinacci, and Sujoy Mukerji, 2009, Recursive Smooth Ambiguity Preferences,
Journal of Economic Theory 144, 930–976.
Kothari, S. P., Susan Shu, and Peter D. Wysocki, 2009, Do Managers Withhold Bad News?, Journal of
Accounting Research 47, 241–276.
30
=== PAGE 32 ===
Kreps, David M., and Evan L. Porteus, 1978, Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic Choice
Theory, Econometrica 46, 185–200.
Kurov, Alexander, Marketa Halova Wolfe, and Thomas Gilbert, 2021, The disappearing pre-FOMC an-
nouncement drift, Finance Research Letters 40, 101781.
Kuttner, Kenneth N, 2001, Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed funds futures
market, Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 523–544.
Kwon, Hyosung, and Jianjun Miao, 2019, Woodford’s Approach to Robust Policy Analysis in a Linear-
Quadratic Framework, Macroeconomic Dynamics 23, 1895–1920.
Lemoine, Derek, and Christian Traeger, 2014, Watch Your Step: Optimal Policy in a Tipping Climate,
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6, 137–166.
Li, Kai, and Chenjie Xu, 2022, Asset pricing with a financial sector, Financial Management.
Liu, Bibo, Huijun Wang, Jianfeng Yu, and Shen Zhao, 2020, Time-varying demand for lottery: Speculation
ahead of earnings announcements, Journal of Financial Economics 138, 789–817.
Liu, Hong, Xiaoxiao Tang, and Guofu Zhou, 2022, Recovering the FOMC Risk Premium, Working paper.
Liu, Yang, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2021, Government Policy Announcement Return, Working paper.
Lucas, Robert, 1978, Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica 46, 1429–1446.
Lucca, David O, and Emanuel Moench, 2015, The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift, The Journal of finance
70, 329–371.
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011, Common Risk Factors in Currency Markets,
The Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731–3777.
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2014, Countercyclical currency risk premia, Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 111, 527–553.
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2007, The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Con-
sumption Growth Risk, American Economic Review 97, 89–117.
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011, The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Con-
sumption Growth Risk: Reply, The American Economic Review 101, 3477–3500.
Maccheroni, Fabio, Massimo Marinacci, and Aldo Rustichini, 2006a, Ambiguity Aversion, Robustness, and
the Variational Representation of Preferences, Econometrica 74, 1447–1498.
Maccheroni, Fabio, Massimo Marinacci, and Aldo Rustichini, 2006b, Dynamic variational preferences, Jour-
nal of Economic Theory 128, 4–44.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1986, The Equity Premium and The Concentration of Aggregate Shocks, Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 211–219.
Miao, Jianjun, and Alejandro Rivera, 2016, Robust Contracts in Continuous Time, Econometrica 84, 1405–
1440.
31
=== PAGE 33 ===
Miao, Jianjun, Bin Wei, and Hao Zhou, 2019, Ambiguity Aversion and the Variance Premium, Quarterly
Journal of Finance 09, 1–36.
Morse, Adair, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2020, Information Transmission from the Federal Reserve to
the Stock Market: Evidence from Governors’ Calendars, .
Mueller, Philippe, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, and Andrea Vedolin, 2017, Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy
Uncertainty, The Journal of Finance 72, 1213–1252.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson, 2018a, High-Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-Neutrality: The
Information Effect, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 1283–1330.
Nakamura, Emi, and J´ on Steinsson, 2018b, Identification in Macroeconomics,Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 32, 59–86.
Ozdagli, Ali K., and Mihail Velikov, 2020, Show Me the Money: The Monetary Policy Risk Premium,Journal
of Financial Economics 135, 320–339.
Patton, Andrew J., and Michela Verardo, 2012, Does Beta Move with News? Firm-Specific Information
Flows and Learning about Profitability, The Review of Financial Studies 25, 2789–2839.
Pouzo, Demian, and Ignacio Presno, 2016, Sovereign Default Risk and Uncertainty Premia, American Eco-
nomic Journal: Macroeconomics 8, 230–266.
Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The equity risk premium a solution, Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 117–131.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, 2000, Federal Reserve Information and the Behavior of Interest
Rates, American Economic Review 90, 429–457.
Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson, 2013, How Much Do Investors Care About Macroeconomic Risk? Evidence
from Scheduled Economic Announcement, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48, 343–375.
Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson, 2014, Asset Pricing: A Tale of Two Days, Journal of Financial Economics
113, 171–201.
Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson, 2016, Earnings Announcements and Systematic Risk, The Journal of
Finance 71, 83–138.
Schmidt, Lawrence, 2022, Climbing and Falling Off the Ladder: Asset Pricing Implications of Labor Market
Event Risk, Unpublished Working Paper .
Seo, Sang Byung, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2018, Do Rare Events Explain CDX Tranche Spreads?, The
Journal of Finance 73, 2343–2383.
Seo, Sang Byung, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2019, Option Prices in a Model with Stochastic Disaster Risk,
Management Science 65, 3449–3469.
So, Eric C., and Sean Wang, 2014, News-driven return reversals: Liquidity provision ahead of earnings
announcements, Journal of Financial Economics 114, 20–35.
Strzalecki, Tomasz, 2011, Axiomatic Foundations of Multiplier Preferences, Econometrica 79, 47–73.
32
=== PAGE 34 ===
Swanson, Eric T., 2021, Measuring the effects of federal reserve forward guidance and asset purchases on
financial markets, Journal of Monetary Economics 118, 32–53.
Tsai, Jerry, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2016, Rare Booms and Disasters in a Multisector Endowment Economy,
The Review of Financial Studies 29, 1113–1169.
Tsai, Jerry, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2018, Pricing long-lived securities in dynamic endowment economies,
Journal of Economic Theory 177, 848–878.
Wachter, Jessica, 2013, Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock Market Volatil-
ity?, The Journal of Finance 68, 987–1035.
Wachter, Jessica A, and Yicheng Zhu, 2022, A Model of Two Days: Discrete News and Asset Prices, The
Review of Financial Studies 35, 2246–2307.
Woodford, Michael, 2010, Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy with Near-Rational Expectations, American
Economic Review 100, 274–303.
Zhang, Chu, and Shen Zhao, 2022, The Macroeconomic Announcement Premium and Information Uncer-
tainty, Working paper.
33
=== PAGE 35 ===
7 Appendix (for online publication)
Proof. Proof for Theorem 2
We first provide a more general definition of equilibrium by allowing interbank loans. This
extension does not affect the equilibrium allocation but does help pin down the market rate of
interbank loans. The financial intermediary’s problem in period 0 is
V (n0, s) = max
{α1,B1,n1}

E0

M 1n1
	
(11)
α1Q0 = n0 + 1
Rf,1
B1 + 1
RI,1
BI,1 ,
n1 = α1D1 − B1 − BI,1 ,
Es

M 1n1

≥ θ (α1Q0 − BI,1 ) , (12)
where BI,1 is the amount of interbank loan and RI,1 is the interest rate on interbank loans. As
in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), the limited commitment constraint (12) reflects the fact that
the intermediary can default on household loans but not interbank loans. Peer banks have the
technology to perfectly enforce loan contracts. Similarly, the intermediary’s optimization problem
in period −1 is
V (n−1) = max
{α0,B0,n0}

E−1

M 0V (n0, s)
	
(13)
α0Q−1 = n−1 + 1
Rf,0
B0 + 1
RI,0
BI,0 ,
n0 = α0Q0 − B0,
E−1

M 0n0

≥ θ (α0Q0 − BI,0 ) . (14)
Because all intermediaries are identical, in equilibrium BI,t = 0 for all t.
To solve for the equilibrium prices and allocations in period 0, we focus on the optimality
condition for (9). The first order condition with respect to α1 implies
Es

M 1
 D1
Q0
− Rf,1

(1 + λ (s)) = θλ (s) . (15)
Because M 1 is the marginal rate of substitution of households and because the announcement fully
reveals uncertainty, M 1Rf,1 = 1. This condition implies that i) if λ (s) = 0, then Q0 = 1
Rf,1
D1, and
constraint (12) is not binding: n0 ≥ θQ0; and ii) if λ (s) = 0, then Q0 is determined by the binding
limited commitment constraint (12), that is,

1 + θ − E

M 1 D1
Q0

Q0 = n0, (16)
which imples Q0 = 1
1+θ
h
n0 + 1
Rf,1
D1
i
.
34
=== PAGE 36 ===
The first order condition (15) implies that λ (s) =
E
h
M 1 D1
Q0
i
−1
1+θ−E
h
M 1 D1
Q0
i , or
1 + λ (s) = θ
1 + θ − E
h
M 1 D1
Q0
i . (17)
Combining this equation with (16), it follows that in equilibrium,
1 + λ (s) = θ
1 + θ − E
h
M 1 D1
Q0
i = θQ0
n0
=
θ

n0 + 1
Rf,1
D1

(1 + θ) n0
whenever the constraint is binding.
Consider the intermediary’s maximization problem in period−1. Using the linearity of V (n0, s),
the optimality conditions imply
E0

M 0 {1 + λ (s)} Q0
Q−1

= E0

M 0 {1 + λ (s)} RI,0

. (18)
Because M 0 = u′(C0)
u′(C0) is a constant, equation 18 can be simplified to E0
h
{1 + λ (s)} Q0
Q−1
i
=
E0 [{1 + λ (s)}] RI,0 . Clearly, the sign of the announcement premium depends on the covariance of
1 + λ (s) and Q0 (s). Note that in equilibrium, n0 = Q0 − B0. Combining this equation with (16),
we have, whenever the limited commitment constraint (12) is binding,
Q0 = 1
θ
 ¯P (s) − B0

, (19)
and
n0 = 1
θ
 ¯P (s) − (1 + θ) B0

.
Clearly, because ¯P (s) is strictly increasing in s, ¯P (1) > (1 + θ) B0 insures that n0 is always
positive for all realizations of s. In addition, equation (17) implies that λ (s) > 0 if and only if
¯P (s)
Q0
> 1, which, using (19), is equivalent to 1
1−θ B0 > ¯P0 (s). Finally, note that 1
1−θ > 1 + θ
because θ ∈ (0, 1). As a result,

(1 + θ) B0, 1
1−θ B0

is a non-empty set. This completes the proof
for Theorem 2.
35